This copiously illustrated volume is the first systematic general work to do justice to the fruits of recent scholarship in the history of natural history. Public interest in this lively field has been stimulated by environmental concerns and through links with the histories of art, collecting and gardening. The centrality of the development of natural history for other branches of history - medical, colonial, gender, economic, ecological - is increasingly recognized.
Twenty-four specially commissioned essays cover the period from the sixteenth century, when the first institutions of natural history were created, to its late nineteenth-century transformation by practitioners of the new biological sciences. An introduction discusses novel approaches that have made this a major focus for research in cultural history. The essays, which include sugges-tions for further reading, offer a coherent and accessible overview of a fascinating subject. An epilogue highlights the relevance of this wide-ranging survey for current debates on museum prac-tice, the display of ecological diversity and the environment.


í


Cultures of natural history


>







.<. i


1 .

Cultures of natural history

"i i

EDITED BY
N. JARDINE, J. A. SECORD and E. C. SPARY

9





Cambridge
UNIVERSITY PRESS


PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, ny 10011-4211, USA
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, vie 3166, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521453943
. Cambridge University Press 1996
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1996 Reprinted'1997/2000
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data applied for
ISBN-13 978-0-521-45394-3 hardback
ISBN-10 0-521-45394-1 hardback
ISBN-13 978-0-521-55894-5 paperback
ISBN-10 0-521-55894-8 paperback

Transferred to digital printing 2005

wv


r

Contents

List of figures page ix
List of tables xv
Notes on contributors xvi
Acknowledgements _xxi 9

INTRODUCTION
I The natures of cultural history 3
Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary

1 CURIOSITY, ERUDITION AND UTILITY
2 Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 17
William B. Ashworth, Jr.
3 The culture of gardens 38
Andrew Cunningham
4 Courting nature 57
Paula Findlen
5 The culture of curiosity 75
Katie Whitaker
6 Physicians and natural history 91
Harold J. Cook
1 Natural history as print culture 106
Adrian Johns

II VIRTUOSITY, IMPROVEMENT AND SENSIBILITY
8 Natural history in the academies 127
Daniel Roche
9 Carl Linnaeus in his time and place 145
Lisbet Koerner
10 Gender and natural history 163
Londa Schiebinger

vii



viii Contents


11 Political, natural and bodily economies 178
Emma Spary
12 The science of man 197
Paul B. Wood
13 The natural history of the earth 211
Martin Guntau
14 Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 230
Nicholas Jardine
III DISCIPLINE, DISCOVERY AND DISPLAY
15 New spaces in natural history 249
Dorinda Outram
16 Minerals, strata and fossils 266
Martin Rudwick
17 Humboldtian science 287
Michael Dettelbach
18 Biogeography and empire 305
Janet Browne
19 Travelling the other way 322
Gillian Beer
20 Ethnological encounters 338
Michael T. Bravo
21 Equipment for the field 358
Anne Larsen
22 Artisan botany 378
Anne Secord
23 Tastes and crazes 394
David Allen
24 Nature for the people 408
Jean-Marc Drouin and Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent
25 Natural history and the ‘new’ biology 426
Lynn K. Nyhart
EPILOGUE
26 The crisis of nature 447
James A. Secord

Notes
Index

460
495


Figures

Frontispiece John Glashan, Spectator (29 January 1994), p. 17. By permission of the artist and the publisher
2.1 Fox. Courtesy of the History of Science Collection, Linda
Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri page
2.2 Fox emblem. Courtesy of the Spencer Research Library,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
2.3 Hedgehog. Courtesy of the History of Science Collection,
Linda Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
2.4 Fox. Courtesy of the History of Science Collection, Linda
Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
2.5 Ichneumon. Courtesy of the History of Science
Collection, Linda Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
2.6 Ichneumons. Courtesy of the History of Science
Collection, Linda Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
2.7 Emblem of the fox on ice. Courtesy of the Spencer
Research Library, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
2.8 Emblem of the fox and badger. Courtesy of the Spencer
Research Library, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
2.9 Fox skeleton. Courtesy of the History of Science
Collection, Linda Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
2.10 Ichneumon. Courtesy of the History of Science
Collection, Linda Hall Library, Kansas City, Missouri
3.1 The Virgin Mary. By permission of the Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris
3.2 Belvedere Court in the Vatican Palace. Uffizi Gallery,
Florence, 2559A
3.3 Garden and sculpture garden in Belvedere Court. Avery
Architectural and Fine Arts Library, Columbia University in the City of New York
3.4 The Padua physic/botanic garden today. Y. Mitsui
3.5 Jardin Royal in Paris. Sherard 392, Department of Plant
Sciences, University of Oxford
ix


18
24
25
26
27
29
31
32
34
35
40
44
46
48
49


x List of figures


3.6 The growing and preparation of medicinal herbs. Fotomas

Index, London 50
3.7 Title-page from Gerard’s Herball. By permission of the
Trustees of the Wellcome Trust, Wellcome Institute Library 51
3.8 ‘Spring’: Dutch garden scene. Mansell Collection,
London 54
4.1 Aldrovandi giving his Omithologia to Clement VIII. By
permission of Bancroft Library, University of
California, Berkeley 61
4.2 Botanical expedition. By permission of the British Library 62
4.3 Mercati’s mineralogical museum. By permission of the
British Library: MSS Add. 22332, f. 171 63
4.4 Aldrovandi’s ‘Peruvian chrysanthemum’. By permission
of the Biblioteca Universitaria, Bologna 67
4.5 Museum of Ferrante Imperato. By permission of the
Biblioteca Universitaria, Bologna 69
4.6 Page from Aldrovandi’s ‘Book in which Men . . . Write
Their Own Name’. By permission of the Biblioteca Universitaria, Bologna: Aldrovandi, MS. 41 70
5.1 Selection of natural curiosities. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 77
5.2 Enston Waterworks. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 79
5.3 Specimens illustrated in the accurate style. By permission
of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 83
5.4 The collection of Olaus Worm. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 86
6.1 Depiction of purple violet. By permission of the
Department of Special Collections, Memorial Library, University of Wisconsin-Madison 98
6.2 English spiders. By permission of the Department of
Special Collections, Memorial Library, University of Wisconsin-Madison 101
6.3 Mosquito larvae. By permission of the Department of
Special Collections, Memorial Library, University of Wisconsin-Madison 103
6.4 Octopus. By permission of the Department of Special
Collections, Memorial Library, University of Wisconsin-Madison 104
7.1 The printing house. Bodleian Library 115
7.2 Heylyn’s Cosmographie. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 118
7.3 Bohun’s Geographical Dictionary. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 120


List of figures xi


7.4 Heylyn/Bohun, Cosmography. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 122
8.1 Sites of academies in France 128
8.2 Experimentation at the Académie Royale des
Sciences 139
9.1 Linnaeus’s drawing of a pearlfisher’s craft 159
9.2 Linnaeus’s sketch of‘Andromeda’ 160
9.3 Linnaeus’s sketch of a ‘Same’ man carrying a canoe 161
10.1 Hermaphroditic flower. By courtesy of Princeton
University Library 166
10.2 Sexual relations between plants 168
10.3 Linnaeus’s ‘Classes or Letters’ 173
11.1 The first banana plant to flower in Europe. By permission
of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 180
11.2 Experiments on the polyp. By permission of the Syndics
of Cambridge University Library 182
11.3 ‘Changing a quadruped into man’. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 190
11.4 Vaucanson’s Account of the Mechanism of an Automaton.
By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 192
11.5 ‘Gross brutality . . .’By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 193
12.1 Lord Karnes, Hugo Arnot and Lord Monboddo. Courtesy
of Roger Emerson 206
13.1 Abraham Gottlob Werner 213
13.2 Mineral collection of Freiberg Mining Academy. By
permission of the Bibliothek der TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Wiss. Altbestand 216
13.3 Beringer’s fossil specimens 219
13.4 Scheuchzer’s fossil portraits 220
13.5 ‘Image of Christ on the cross’ 221
13.6 Section of stratification at the Mansfeld Kupferschiefer.
By permission of the Bibliothek der TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Wiss. Altbestand 223
13.7 Map of Thuringia, Saxony 224
13.8 Theoretical cross-section of the earth 227
14.1 The ‘great egg of nature’ 238
14.2 The perfection of the skull 241
15.1 Skeleton and bones of the Madrid Megatherium 252
15.2 Zoology galleries at the Muséum in 1815 253
15.3 The greenhouse at the Muséum 254
15.4 Cuvier’s house at the Muséum 255
15.5 Giraffe at the Muséum 256
15.6 Expedition into the Brazilian forest 260


xii List of figures


15-7
15.8
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6
?
16.7
16.8
16.9
16.10
17.1
17.2
173
17.4
18.1
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.5
18.6
19.1
19.2
193


Georges Cuvier. By permission of the Bibliothèque
Nationale, Paris 261
Allegory of natural history 264
Horace Bénédict de Saussure 267
Eighteenth-century fossil illustration. By permission of
the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 268
Extinct volcano in central France. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 271
The 1767 eruption of Vesuvius. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 272
Key to a late eighteenth-century mineral map. By per-
mission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 273 Engraved ‘mineralogical map’. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 275
William Smith’s Geological Section. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 276
Buckland’s generalized ‘ideal section’ 278
Frontispiece to Lyell’s Principles of Geology 282
De la Beche’s ‘A more ancient Dorset’. Reproduced by
courtesy of the National Museum of Wales 284
Measurements from the Physical Profile of the Andes. By
permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University
Library 292
‘Map of isothermal lines’. By permission of the Syndics of
the Cambridge University Library 296
Frontispiece to the Atlas ge'ographique. By permission of
the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 302
Humboldt in his study 303
Collecting as a form of sport. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 307
The great conservatory at Chatsworth 309
Joseph Hooker in the Himalayas. By permission of the
British Library 313
The variation of vegetation with altitude 317
Visiting the zoo. By permission of the Wellcome Institute
Library 318
Wallace’s Line. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 319
Marten’s drawing of a Fuegian. By permission of the
Syndics of Cambridge University Library 326
‘Fuegians going to trade’. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 333
Comparative portraits. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 335


List of figures xiii


20.1 Emblem of the Aborigines Protection Society. By
permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 341
20.2 Map of Ava. By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge
University Library 349
20.3 ‘Dr. Spurzheim in his consulting room’. By permission of
the Wellcome Institute Videodisc Archive, Wellcome Institute Library, London 350
20.4 Ethnological exhibit at Sydenham. By permission of the
Guildhall Library, Corporation of London 354
20.5 Page from Journal of the Ethnological Society of London.
By permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 355
21.1 Page from Graves’s Naturalist's Pocket-Book. By
permission of the Linnean Society, London 363
21.2 Geological hammers. By permission of the Linnean
Society, London 365
21.3 Fungus collectors. By permission of the Linnean Society,
London 367
21.4 Smith’s impression of a collecting expedition. By
permission of the Linnean Society, London: collection of printed ephemera 368
21.5 Natural history equipment. By permission of the Linnean
Society, London 369
21.6 Page from Turgot’s Mémoire instructif showing how to
skin a bird. By permission of the Linnean Society, - London 371
21.7 Turgot’s illustration of the taxidermist’s craft. By
permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library 372
21.8 Entomological equipment 375
22.1 Moss specimens. By permission of Chetham’s Library,
Manchester 382
22.2 Hypnum salebrosum. By permission of the Syndics of
Cambridge University Library 385
22.3 Epitaph on Horsefield’s gravestone. By permission of
Manchester Public Libraries: Local Studies Unit 390
23.1 Shell ‘portrait’. By permission of the Wellcome Institute
Library, London 396
23.2 Shore collecting 399
23.3 Ward’s fern-case. By permission of the Wellcome
Institute Library, London 401
23.4 Marine aquarium. By permission of the Wellcome
Institute Library, London 406
24.1 ‘The verge of a beautiful forest . . .’By permission of the


xiv List of figures


Médiathèque d’histoire des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 411
24.2 Brazilian landscape. By permission of the Médiathèque
d’histoire des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 412
24.3 The botany of the old gardener. By permission of the
Médiathèque d’histoire des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 413
24.4 Grus cinerea. By permission of the Médiathèque d’histoire
des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 416
24.5 ‘Look at this nest in the ivy’. By permission of the
Médiathèque d’histoire des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 418
24.6 ‘Ideal view of the earth in the Lias period’. By permission
of the Médiathèque d’histoire des sciences, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris 422
25.1 Life history of Proiomyxa aurantiaca 428
25.2 Frontispiece to Haeckel’s History of Creation 431
25.3 Researchers at the Zoology Institute, Heidelberg 436
25.4 The Science Hall at the University of Wisconsin. Photo
X25 665, by permission of the University of Wisconsin-Madison Archives 437
25.5 Helgoland Biological Research Station 439
25.6 Plans for Helgoland Biological Research Station 440
26.1 ‘Projet de Muséum’ 448
26.2 New uses for natural history collections. By permission of
the Natural History Museum 453
26.3 ‘Disney’ dinosaur cartoon. By permission of Nature, 456


Tables

7.1 Peter Heylyn, Microcosmus and Cosmographie, 1621-1703
14.1 Esenbeck’s derivation of the fundamentals of plant
anatomy
14.2 Oken’s construction of the series of animal classes
20.1 Vocabulary list taken from the Khond people in
the Gomsur mountains of Orissa, India

page 109
239
242
346

XV



Notes on contributors

DAVID ALLEN is an Honorary Lecturer in the History of Biology at the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine and Co-ordinator of the History of Medicine Programme of the Wellcome Trust. He is the author of three books and numerous journal art-icles on the social development of natural History, more especially in the nineteenth century. The Naturalist in Britain: A Social His-tory (1976) has been a Penguin paperback and translated into Japanese. It has recently been reissued by Princeton University Press.

WILLIAM B. ASHWORTH, JR is Associate Professor of History at the University of Missouri-Kansas City, and Consultant for the History of Science at the Linda Hall Library of Science and Tech-nology, Kansas City. He is interested in interactions between early modern science and the visual arts, and his current book project, ‘Emblematic imagery of the scientific revolution’, is a thematic study of illustrated title-pages of the seventeenth century.

GILLIAN BEER is the Edward VII Professor of English Litera-ture at the University of Cambridge and President of Clare Hall. Her books and pamphlets include Darwin’s Plots (1983), Arguing with the Past (1989), Can the Native Return? (1989) and Forging the Missing Link: Interdisciplinary Stories (1992). She is at present writing a study of island narratives.

B. BENSAUDE-VINCENT is Ma.tre de Conférences in History and Philosophy of Science, Paris X University. After recent publi-cations on the history of chemistry (Histoire de la chimie, 1993; Lavoisier, 1993), she is leading an international research pro-gramme - ‘Sciences and their publics 1789-1968’ - launched by the Centre de Recherches en Histoire des Sciences at the Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie (Paris). This programme will be devel-oped in a series of comparative historical studies on the populariz-ation of science.

xvi



Notes on contributors xvii


MICHAEL BRAVO is a British Academy Post-Doctoral Research Fellow in the Department of the History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Cambridge, where he lectures and does research on the history of anthropology. Drawing on extensive field-work in the north of Canada, he studies the history and phil-osophy of ethno-science. His forthcoming book examines early British anthropology seen from the perspectives of both British scientists and the people they encountered.
JANET BROWNE is the author of The Secular Ark: Studies in the History of Biogeography (1983) and Charles Darwin: Voyaging (1995), and co-editor of Dictionary of the History of Science (1981). She recently retired from the Darwin Correspondence project in order to complete her biography of Darwin. She teaches at the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine.
HAROLD J. COOK is Professor and Chair of the Department of the History of Medicine at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and has research interests in early modern European intellectual and social life, with special interest in England and the Nether-lands. He has published articles on English and Dutch medicine and natural history, and on the scientific revolution, and two books: The Decline of the Old Medical Regime in Stuart London (1986), and Trials of an Ordinary Doctor: Joannes Groenevelt in 17th Century London (1994).
ANDREW CUNNINGHAM teaches in the Cambridge Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine. He is joint editor of a number of volumes, including Romanticism and the Sciences (with Nick Jardine, 1990), The Laboratory Revolution in Medicine (with Perry Williams, 1992) and Medicine and the Reformation (with Ole Grell, 1993). He loves watching gardeners at work in gardens but, to his wife’s despair, never shows the faintest inclination to do any gardening.
MICHAEL DETTELBACH is Assistant Professor of History at Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, where he teaches modern European history and history of science. At the moment, he is turning his Cambridge dissertation, a biographical treatment of Humboldt and his terrestrial physics, into a book, and is looking into the relationship between German mathematics, the Berlin Academy of Sciences and the Prussian military in the 1820s and 1830s.
JEAN-MARC DROUIN is Lecturer at the Muséum national d’his-toire des sciences et des techniques at the Cité des Sciences (La


xviii Notes on contributors


Villette). He has published Réinventer la nature: L’écologie et son histoire (1991). He is currently working on natural history and the public.
PAULA FINDLEN is Associate Professor of History at the Uni-versity of California-Davis, where she teaches early modern Euro-pean history and the history of science and medicine. She is the author of Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting and Scientific Cul-ture in Early Modem Italy (1994). Currently she is working on a book entitled When Science Became Serious.
MARTIN GUNTAU was, until his retirement in 1992, Professor of History of Science at the University of Rostock in Germany. He has published over a hundred articles, books and edited vol-umes on historical and philosophical problems in the natural sci-ences. His works include Die Genesis der Geologie als Wissenschaft (1984) and Abraham Gottlob Werner (1984).
NICK JARDINE is Professor of History and Philosophy of the Sciences at the University of Cambridge. His books include The Birth of History and Philosophy of Science: Kepler’s ‘A Defense of Tycho against Ursus’ with Essays on its Provenance and Significance (1984), The Fortunes of Inquiry (1986), Romanticism and the Sci-ences, ed. with Andrew Cunningham (1990), and The Scenes of Inquiry: On the Reality of Questions in the Sciences (1991). He is editor of Studies in History and Philosophy of Science. His current research projects are on historical consciousness in the sciences and, in collaboration with Alain Segonds, on priority disputes in early modern cosmology.
ADRIAN JOHNS was a Research Fellow at Downing College, Cambridge, between 1991 and 1994, and is currently Lecturer in the History of Science at the University of Kent. He has taught widely in the history of science before the mid-nineteenth century. His own research centres on the social history of early modern natural philosophy, science and medicine, and he is now complet-ing a book on natural philosophy and the history of the book in early modern England.
LISBET KOERNER is Assistant Professor in the Department of the History of Science, Harvard University, specializing in modern German and Scandinavian history of the life sciences. She is cur-rently working on a biography of Linnaeus (forthcoming, Harvard University Press). One of her key interests is the history of how science has been understood to relate to politics and economics.


Notes on contributors


ANNE LARSEN received her Ph.D. from Princeton in 1993; her dissertation is entitled ‘Not Since Noah: The English Scientific Zoologists and the Craft of Collecting, 1800-1840’. Presently she is an independent scholar associated with the Smithsonian Insti-tution, where she continues to investigate the origins and construc-tion of zoological specimens.
LYNN K. NYHART is Assistant Professor in the Department of the History of Science at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where she teaches courses on the history of modern science, the history of biology and biology and gender. Her book, The Shaping of Biology: Animal Morphology and the German Universities, 1800- 1900, will be published by the University of Chicago Press in 1995. She is beginning a new project on nineteenth-century zpological research outside Germany’s universities and looks forward to visit-ing numerous German zoos, natural history museums and fisheries research stations in the next few summers.
DORINDA OUT RAM lectures in history at University College, Cork, Republic of Ireland. She was Visiting Scholar at Griffith University, Australia in 1989-90, and Landon Clay Visiting Associate Professor at Harvard in 1992-3. She is the author of Georges Cuvier (1984), The Body and the French Revolution (1989) and The Enlightenment (1995).
DANIEL ROCHE is Professeur d’Histoire Moderne at the Sor-bonne, Directeur d’études at the école des Hautes études en Sci-ences Sociales, and Directeur of the Institut d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine in Paris. He teaches on the intellectual, cultural and social history of modern France, and his current interests include the cultural anthropology of mobility and the history of equestrian culture in Europe. Amongst his publications are Le Siècle des lumières en province (Paris, 1978, new edn 1989); The People of Paris (orig. 1981; Leamington Spa, 1987); Les Répub-licains des lettres (Paris, 1988) and The Culture of Clothing (orig. 1989; Cambridge, 1994).
MARTIN RUDWICK has taught the history of science at Cam-bridge, Amsterdam, Princeton and, since 1988, in the Science Studies programme at the University of California-San Diego. He is the author of The Meaning of Fossils (1972), The Great Devonian Controversy (1985), Scenes from Deep Time (1992) and many articles on the history of geology and palaeontology in the nineteenth century.


xx Notes on contributors


LON DA SCHIEBINGER is Professor of History and Women’s Studies at Pennsylvania State University, and Founding Director of the Institute for Women in the Sciences and Engineering. She is author of The Mind Has No Sex? Women in the Origins of Modem Science (1989) and Nature’s Body: Gender in the Making of Modem Science (1993), along with numerous articles and book chapters. She is currently working on a book entitled ‘Women and science: the clash of two cultures’.
ANNE SECORD worked as Assistant Editor of The Correspondence of Charles Darwin for the first seven volumes. She is currently a Resident Associate of the Cambridge Wellcome Unit and an exter-nal Ph.D. student at London University. Her research focuses on popular, particularly working-class, natural history in nineteenth- century Britain.
JIM SECORD lectures in the Department of History and Philos-ophy of Science at the University of Cambridge. His interests include the history of the life and earth sciences since 1750, and the relations between science and its audiences. His publications include Controversy in Victorian Geology: The Cambrian-Silurian Dispute (1986). He has completed a book on early Victorian contro-versies about creation and natural law, provisionally entitled Evol-ution for the People.
EMMA SPARY is a Research Fellow at the Department of His-tory, University of Warwick. Between 1992 and 1995 she was a Research Fellow of Girton College, Cambridge, and taught at the Department of History and Philosophy of Science, Cambridge, on natural history in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Amongst her research interests are notions of the natural, the uses of the body, agriculture and food, and forms of association in eighteenth and early nineteenth-century France. Her publications include Making the Natural Order, forthcoming.
KATIE WHITAKER is a Ph.D. student in the Department of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Cambridge. Her dissertation title is ‘Curiosi and Virtuosi: Gentlemanly Cul-ture, Experimental Philosophy and Politics in England, 1580- 1720’.
PAUL WOOD is an Associate Professor in the Department of His-tory, University of Victoria, Canada, where he teaches courses on the history of science and the intellectual history of early modern Europe. His research focuses on the Scottish Enlightenment, and he has published The Aberdeen Enlightenment: The Arts Curriculum in the Eighteenth Century (1993) as well as articles on Scottish sci-ence and philosophy.


i


Acknowledgements

First and foremost, we thank our contributors for the promptness with which they delivered their fine essays and responded to edi-torial suggestions.
Since the autumn of 1988, the Department of History and Phil-osophy of Science and the Wellcome Unit for the History of Medi-cine at Cambridge have sponsored the Cabinet of Natural History (the Cambridge Group for the History of Natural History and the Environmental Sciences). Our plans for the present volume were inspired by the lively sessions of the Cabinet, and we thank all its members, especially its founder members and secretaries: David Allen, Ken Arnold, Henry Atmore, Michael Bravo, Helen Brock, Janet Browne, Andrew Cunningham, Michael Dettelbach, Shelley Innes, Myles Jackson, Adrian Johns, Simon Schaffer, Anne Secord, Ruth Stungo, Jennifer Tucker, Sonia Uyterhoeven, Max Walters, Katie Whitaker and Frances Willmoth.
Sven Widmalm advised on Swedish, and Emma Spary took main responsibility for translating the essays of Martin Guntau and Daniel Roche.
We thank Marina Frasca-Spada, Anne Secord and Paul White for constructive suggestions at various stages in the editing and for putting up with us.

xxi




Introduction




i


NICHOLAS JARDINE AND EMMA SPARY

I The natures of cultural history

In 1690, the Perpetual Secretary of the Académie Fran.aise, Antoine Furetière, included natural objects in his definition of the symbol in the Académie’s Dictionnaire universel: ‘The lion is the symbol of valour . . . the pelican that of paternal love’.1 At the end of the seventeenth century it was still commonplace for natural objects to be used as symbols for particular human qualities. A century later, however, such readings had little place in learned writing. As the Revolutionary legislator, Constantin-Fran.ois Chassebeuf de Volney declared: ‘Man is ruled by natural laws . . . and these laws, the common source of good and evil, are not written in the stars, nor hidden in mysterious codes’. But in rejecting sym-bolic readings of natural objects, Volney by no means denied that human lessons are to be learnt from natural history. Rather, knowledge of ‘the nature of the beings which surround him and [of] his own nature’ would teach man the ‘motors of his destiny’ - in this specific context, the true course of Revolutionary political reform.2
The period covered by this volume shows many such drastic shifts in the meanings and human significances of natural objects. But there is one constancy, namely, the importance of the roles assigned to natural history in the commonwealth of learning: as a universal discipline, prior to political, social and moral order; as the partner with civil and sacred history in the revelation of the workings of divine providence; as the universal and stable foun-dation for the transitory and speculative systems of natural philos-ophy; as the basis for the agricultural, commercial and colonial improvement of the human estate. Today, natural history seems marginal to our concerns, appearing primarily as an amateur, popular, local study. It is the experimental and mathematical sci-ences to which debates about the ‘true’ principles of social and mental order appeal, and which serve as a model of expertise and professionalism.
Nature too has been marginalized and devalued. In his Die Lehrlinge zu Sais (‘The Apprentices at Sais’), Friedrich von Hard- enberg, a Saxon mining official, poet and naturalist better known as Novalis, declared that ‘The ways of contemplating nature are

3



4 Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary


innumerable.’3 The apprentices live in a museum, working under a master modelled on Abraham Gottlob Werner, director of the Freiberg mining academy. The work opens with their celebration of the multiformity of nature: as inexhaustible treasury of pheno-mena, to be gathered and ordered by the rational philosopher; as the invincible oppressor of mankind, the nemesis of reason; as a vulnerable enemy to be enslaved by turning her forces against her; as prolific mistress of the poet, whose playful creativity he emu-lates; as ailing victim of naturalists who plunder her; as longed-for homeland; as wilderness to be tamed and cultivated; as desolation, prison and slaughterhouse; as hieroglyphic, divine language, mirror of the soul.4
If a single vision predominates in modern Western society, it is that of a passive and disempowered nature, slave and victim of human agency. Admittedly, notions of an active nature are not altogether extinct: there are, for example, many who adhere to some version of the ‘Gaia hypothesis’, according to which the Earth is an organism whose harmonious balance, temporarily disrupted by humanity, will eventually be restored.5 But Novalis’ multifa-ceted creative nature, variously well- or ill-disposed towards man-kind, is irretrievably lost. The present volume is concerned with the practices of naturalists from the sixteenth-century revival of natural history to its late nineteenth-century transformation at the hands of practitioners of the new biological sciences. Through these studies, we hope to convey something of the past complexity and diversity of attitudes to nature.

Histories of natural history
In his Introductory Discourse on the Rise and Progress of Natural History of 1788, James Edward Smith, purchaser of the Linnaean collections and first president of the Linnean Society of London, sketched the history of natural history from its conjectural origins when man lived in ‘a state of nature’. Claiming to offer an impartial account of the merits of past naturalists, Smith tells a story of liber-ation of natural history from ‘superstitious theory’, from vulgar insistence on medical utility and from national prejudice (especially French). Linnaeus, Smith claims, was the one who first ‘supervised and methodized’ the whole of natural history, and subsequent pro-gress has come about through the spread of Linnaean doctrines and methods.
Certain aspects of Smith’s account - its placing of natural history in the context of a conjectural universal history of mankind, and its linking of the advancement of learning with the conquest of superstition - are typical of the Enlightened historiography of his period. But there are other features that his account shares with


The natures of cultural history 5


the vast majority of subsequent histories of natural history: the nar-ration of a progress culminating in the present state of the subject; the emphasis on the discovery by heroic geniuses of doctrines which anticipate current views; and the explanation of the growth of knowledge by the appeal to the use of sound methods. Further, for all their frequent parades of objectivity, they serve to legitimate particular theoretical concerns and disciplinary factions or to locate the historian as practitioner within a particular disciplinary tra-dition. Such epic histories so re-present and re-work past cultures of natural history as to make them appear directed towards the writer’s own time and culture.
It is now fashionable to dismiss such histories en bloc - but this is surely a mistake. Victor Cams’ Geschichte der Zoologie (1872), Julius von Sachs’ Geschichte der Botanik (1875) and K. A. von Zit- tel’s Geschichte der Geologie und Pal.ontologie (1899), are magis-terial histories of zoology, botany and geology which celebrated the consolidation of these disciplines as triumphant natural sciences in the new German Kaiserreich.6 But they are also works whose mass-ive and meticulous scholarship laid a foundation for subsequent interpretations.
The link between upheaval in the life and earth sciences and concern with their histories was evident also in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, a period of dramatic developments in taxonomy, gen-etics and molecular biology, many of which challenged the neo- Darwinian evolutionary synthesis. At the same time the earth sci-ences were revolutionized by the new plate tectonics. The appearance of a number of major new historical journals, such as the Journal of the History of Biology, founded in 1967, and Histoire et nature, first published in 1971 under the title Histoire et biologie, marked the upsurge in interest. Works such as Bentley Glass et al. (eds.), Forerunners of Darwin (1959) and Philip Ritterbush, Overtures to Biology (1964) traced the remote ancestry of modern disciplines. At a more local level there were many attempts to find distant anticipations of the latest theoretical innovations. For example, much discussion of the works of the eighteenth-century botanist Michel Adanson was generated by claims that he had invented methods of classification according to the proportion of matches in characters, all characters being equally weighted - methods anticipating those of the new computer-based taxonomy of the 1970s.7
It would be a mistake to portray all historiography of natural history of the first half of the twentieth century as built around scientific progress and the anticipation of current doctrines. There are notable exceptions. One is Form and Function: A Contribution to the History of Animal Morphology (1916), by Edward Stuart Russell, proponent of a holistic, vitalistic and teleological biology. It is


6 Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary


remarkable for the respect it shows for the categories and philo-sophical assumptions of past naturalists, and for the sympathy with which it expounds past approaches far removed from the main lines of progress as generally understood at the time. Equally strik-ing are the works of Henri Daudin, pupil of the anthropologist Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, and friend of the cultural historian Lucien Febvre. His De Linné á Lamarck. Méthodes de la classification et idee de serie en botanique et en zoologie (1740-1790), and Cuvier et Lamarck. Les Classes zoologiques et Tidée de série animale (1790- 1830) (1926-7), are notable for the care with which they relate past systems of classification to the specific collecting, horticultural and curatorial activities of the naturalists.
Concern with the history of natural history of another very dif-ferent sort is a by-product of the rules of botanical and zoological nomenclature established at the International Congresses of Botany, Zoology and Geology in the closing decades of the nine-teenth century.8 Ascertaining the correct names of living beings in accordance with the internationally agreed rules often requires extensive study of the publications and collections of past natural-ists. As well as a substantial body of valuable scholarly literature, this professional interest of systematists and taxonomists in the his-tory of their own discipline has produced a series of indispensable reference works - notably, for Britain, Ray Desmond and Chris-tine Ellwood’s Dictionary of British and Irish Botanists and Horticul- turalists (1994), and Frans A. Stafleu et al. (eds.), Taxonomical Lit-erature (1976-1988), as well as the Journal of the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History (later Archives of Natural History), founded in 1936.9
Despite these exceptions, the historiography of natural history continued to be dominated by tales of anticipations and progress until quite recently. Since the mid-1960s, however, the emphasis has gradually shifted to approaches that, in Thomas Kuhn’s words, ‘rather than seeking the permanent contributions of an older sci-ence to our present vantage, attempt to display the historical integ-rity of that science in its own time’.10 Thus, in the field of history of natural history, a number of works sought to reconstruct the meanings of past theories and systems within the framework of the presuppositions and conceptual categories of their period; notable examples are Elizabeth Gasking, Investigations into Generation, 1631-1828 (1967) and Mary P. Winsor, Starfish, Jellyfish and the Order of Life (1976). Some emphasized the social contexts and uses of the sciences in place of the older ‘internalist’ chronicles of sequences of discoveries and theories; typical of this reorientation are David Allen, The Naturalist in Britain. A Social History (1976), Martin Rudwick, The Meaning of Fossils (1972) and Paul Farber, The Emergence of Ornithology as a Scientific Discipline (1982).


The natures of cultural history 7
-----------------------------------------------------------------------j-----------------
Others protested at the ‘presentism’ of histories of scientific pro-gress, with their imposition of current categories, interests and values on past agents; instead, they have sought to understand past agents in their own terms, to reconstruct their mentalities and con-ceptual frameworks as local and historically contingent creations.
In this they have drawn upon the work of anthropologists con-cerned to do justice to cultural difference, notably Clifford Geertz,
The Interpretation of Cultures (1973) and, in a quite different vein, Dan Sperber, Rethinking Symbolism (1975).
Typical of these new ‘anthropological’ perspectives in the history of natural history are Wolf Lepenies, Das Ende der Naturgeschichte (1976), Scott Atran, Fondements de I’histoire naturelle. Pour une anthropologie de la science (1986, of which Cognitive Foundations of Natural History (1990) is an amended translation) and Krzysztof Pomian, Collectionneurs, amateurs et curieux (1987). In rejecting the traditional narrations of continuity in the growth of disciplines, some have followed Kuhn in claiming priority for local and tacit practices in the formation of the successive and incommensurable ‘paradigms’ of the sciences. Others have emulated Michel Foucault in focusing on radical discontinuities at the level of discursive prac-tices and institutional regimes. In particular, there has been much debate about Foucault’s account, in Les Mots et les choses (1969), of an abrupt shift around 1800 of natural historical discourse from static tabulation of the external similarities and differences of plants and animals to dynamic narration of the inner developmental and historical processes of living beings.11
Where Foucault emphasized the temporal discontinuities of disciplines, others have attended rather to their spatial and social discontinuities, arguing for the importance of national styles, and of divergences between the metropolis and the provinces, between elites and artisans, between authors and their publics, between men and women. And, as Michel Serres has pointed out, the need for a local historiography is particularly pressing in the case of natural history, given the locality of occurrence of natural objects and the fact that naturalists in different places perceive different natural worlds.12 Examples of such ‘decentred’ history of natural history include Bernard Smith’s pioneering European Vision in the South Pacific (2nd edn, 1985), James A. Secord, Controversy in Vic-torian Geology: The Cambrian-Silurian Dispute (1986) and Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (I993)-'3

Cultural history
As a recent reviewer has observed, few historians nowadays ‘feel entirely comfortable saying that they don’t do cultural history’.14


8 Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary


The identity of cultural history is hotly contested, and the remarks that follow are unashamedly prescriptive.15
Two commitments seem to us to be constitutive of cultural his-tory. First, there is the concern with culture in the sense of that which gives meaning to people’s lives, a concern that covers both Matthew Arnold’s elitist ‘best that has been known and thought in the world’ and William Morris’s culture ‘of the people, by the people, and for the people’.16 Secondly, cultural history has to deal with culture in the sense of social habits, the totality of the skills, practices, strategies and conventions by which people constitute and maintain their social existences. In both these senses natural history is a cultural phenomenon. For the values which attach to people’s lives are informed by natural historical reflections on the place of humans in the natural world; and natural history may pro-vide models for the moral and political order of human society. Further, in so far as natural history is a discipline, it lends itself to treatment in terms of the conventions, skills and strategies - let us call them, collectively, practices - through which knowledge claims have been promoted, secured and defended.
It is, we believe, of the utmost importance for all disciplinary history to do justice to the full range of such practices. Our con-cern in this book is to illustrate the range and diversity of cultures of natural history over several centuries. Rather than presenting natural historical knowledge as generated by isolated individuals working wholly within the domain of the mind, we wish to portray natural history as the product of conglomerates of people, natural objects, institutions, collections, finances, all linked by a range of practices of different kinds. As a rough and ready guide we may distinguish the following types of practices.17 Material practices are ways of making, handling and transforming things; in the case of natural history they include the gathering, transport and prep-aration of specimens, the making and distribution of books and illustrations, the performance of experiments. Social practices cover the whole range of associations, recruitments, delegations and negotiations; in particular, in natural history, they include the skills of inspiring trust in other natural historians and assessing their trustworthiness, the conventions and strategies relating spon-sors and patrons to naturalists and naturalists to informants and assistants, the regulations and routines of behaviour in the insti-tutions of natural history - courts, academies, universities, gardens, museums, laboratories.18 Literary practices are conven-tions of genre, representation and persuasion; in natural history and other disciplines these include, along with rational argumen-tation, the gamut of rhetorical and aesthetic forms of persuasion - appeal to historical precedent, to the interest, self-esteem and taste of the reader, for example. Bodily practices are forms of bodily,


The natures of cultural history 9


sartorial or gestural self-presentation and normative accounts of physical and emotional experience in response to particular situ-ations; natural historical examples include the legitimation of natu-ral historical enquiry by appeal to the emotional experiences it engenders, or even accounts of the attire most appropriate for the naturalist. Last, but by no means least, there are reproductive prac-tices, that is, the means by which skills and knowledge are handed on from generation to generation; with natural history, as with other disciplines, these include not merely procedures of formal instruction, but also the informal ways in which the various practi-cal and social skills of the naturalist are imparted.
Exaggeration of the powers of one of these categories of practices at the cost of others is responsible for certain distortions and excesses. Social practices are, indeed, of primary importance for all cultural historians, for it is they that constitute and maintain society, with its institutions and forms of association; it is they, indeed, that provide the framework for all human activities. Alas, some have gone further, attempting to reduce all practices to social practices, and venturing extreme metaphysical claims, for example, that truth and rationality in the arts and sciences is but a mask and emblem of power, or that knowledge in the arts and sciences is but a projection of social interests. Literary practices are likewise of paramount importance for cultural historians who deal with learned disciplines. Unfortunately, some have reduced all past social and natural worlds to the surfaces of documents, insisting that both the objects and the authors of natural knowledge are mere projections from the flat plane of the textual universe. One route to this fantasy starts by ignoring the material traces of past disciplines - instruments, buildings, specimens - and goes on to claim that since our only access to the past is through texts, texts are the only genuine subjects of historical enquiry. Another, and more insidious, inference moves from the observation that all human practices embody symbolic and conventional elements to the conclusion that all human practices are at bottom linguistic practices. Such ‘pantextualism’, much in evidence in the ‘cultural studies’ sections of bookshops, makes the historian both blind and unjust: blind to the social and natural materials represented in texts and involved in their production, and unjust to those silent majori-ties who never made it into the world of documents.19
In contrast with such belated idealisms, a cultural history that attends to the full range of disciplinary practices can, we believe, do justice to the natural, social and textual worlds. By tracking the local and day-to-day routines of past inquirers, such a history can convey aspects of their lived experience. By studying the means by which they sought to resolve questions, it can reconstruct the ranges of questions real for them, their ‘scenes’ of inquiry.20


io Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary


By reconstructing changes in investigative practices and the ways they were brought about, it can explain the formation and dissol-ution of disciplines. And by charting the production, distribution and reception of knowledge claims, it can reveal the ways in which the social and natural worlds give rise to their representations and are transformed by those representations.

Scope of the hook
The essays in the volume cover the contents and context of natural history from the sixteenth century to the present. The work falls into three sections, starting at the time when the first botanic gard-ens were being founded across Europe, in Italy, Holland, France and England, as discussed by Cunningham. Whilst natural history flourished in this medical context, as Cook’s essay reveals, Findlen and Whitaker show that it also found powerful support in the courtly and gentlemanly cultures of Renaissance and early modern Europe. Ashworth’s essay explores the significances attached to natural historical emblems in these different contexts. Natural his-tory was readily assimilated into the gift-exchange society of the wealthy nobles, which encompassed also the objects of civil his-tory, from paintings to coins. Natural historical objects acquired a concomitant value, since they exemplified the rare, representing the new colonial wealth that could be obtained from the exploi-tation of the exotic. It was the appearance of natural history as a set of practices favoured by court culture which principally ensured the development of natural history as independent from medical and agricultural concerns. As Johns reveals, the development of print culture in the early modern period offered writers on natural history new opportunities, but also new problems, as they struggled to fix a meaning for natural knowledge.
Our second section covers the period from the end of the seven-teenth century to that of the eighteenth century, during which time natural history and its practitioners began to acquire autonomy from courtly culture. The establishment of societies and academies, described by Roche, served to provide naturalists, who were often not of noble birth, with a legitimacy independent of their individ-ual position in the early modern patronage society. As collecting became a pastime of the ‘enlightened’ classes, increasing the rate at which new specimens flooded into European collections, naturalists were increasingly successful in soliciting State funding for their activities. Naturalists linked their activities to fashionable concerns with natural and experimental philosophy, and with the wider Enlightenment movement, so that, as Koerner shows, the question of the practical and/or natural criteria for ordering natural objects became increasingly fraught for naturalists such as Linnaeus. The


The natures of cultural history n


nature of history, too, was open to debate as naturalists distanced their enquiry from that of civil history, whilst many attacked older sacred histories of nature and the earth’s past, as Guntau’s essay reveals. The use of the microscope and the development of com-parative anatomy also opened new realms of enquiry for natural history, as phenomena such as generation or the operations of the mind became legitimate subjects for natural historical enquiry, as Wood and Spary suggest. But, as Schiebinger’s contribution shows, the growing power of naturalists to represent the natural allowed them to make normative claims about social relations. By the end of the eighteenth century, radically new forms and agendas of natural historical inquiry were emerging, particularly in the German lands, as Jardine argues.
In our third section, Outram’s essay demonstrates the increasing institutionalization of natural history from the beginning of the nineteenth century, showing how the construction of the naturalist and natural historical practice were shaped by place and resources; and both she and Dettelbach indicate how apparently ‘new’ kinds of enquiry appearing at this time owe much to the Romantic notion of experimentation and the invention of the ‘discovering hero’. The work of Beer and Browne also illustrates the relations between place, language and natural historical knowledge; for them, as for Dettelbach, the problem of natural historical knowledge at a dis-tance is what is at issue. Both Beer and Bravo address the problem of ethnocentrism in early nineteenth-century travel accounts, although in rather different ways, and both examine how far natu-ral historical travellers could mediate between distant cultures and their own. Rudwick’s essay, too, considers the problems of rep-resenting the distant, whether in space or time, which naturalists confronted in their endeavours to present themselves as experts in a new science of the earth. Such problems were manifest not just in the field, but also in the proximate site for the representation of natural historical knowledge, the collection. Where eighteenth- century collections had been aimed at a single public, differentiated only by degree of knowledge, collections came to be differentially designed during the course of the nineteenth century, with one face for amateurs and another for naturalists. Thus they partook in the shaping of ‘the public’ and its exclusion from natural historical expertise. The essays of Larsen, Allen, A. Secord and Bensaude- Vincent and Drouin address this shift from different perspectives: those of the elite reading public, of artisans, of women, of private collectors. Gradually, natural historical displays ceased to be the site of active research by naturalists: in many institutions, public and research collections were separated; in others, as Nyhart’s chapter reveals, the site of natural historical research shifted from the collection to the laboratory.


12 Nicholas Jardine and Emma Spary


The contributions to this volume are not intended to be specific research articles. Our intention is that this should serve as a work of first resort, demanding no previous acquaintance with the litera-ture of the history of natural history. Because the chapters are intended for a general readership, each provides an account of the wider framework of the subject area. However, all the contri-butions embody at least some of our historiographical prescrip-tions. All avoid anachronism, respecting the categories of the natu-ralists themselves. Almost all are focused on the practices of natural history; a number deal with the social, political and moral uses of natural history; and many discuss the settings and contexts of natural history. The need for generality and continuity has inevi-tably produced a Eurocentric bias and limited attention to local and popular issues. However, decentring is evident in the treatment of developments and receptions of natural history outside the spheres of elites and savants, and in the discussion of the impacts of natural historical exploration on indigenous cultures. Taken as a whole, these essays do, we believe, convey the richness and variety of the past cultures of natural history.
History or hyper-reality?
If a single conclusion is to be drawn from this volume, it is that there is no ‘natural’ conception of nature, no stable inventory of the products of nature, and no universal register of questions time- lessly posed by nature. Rather, the contributions reveal how vari-ous are the frameworks that have structured and informed natural historians’ dealings with nature, how the boundaries between the natural and the conventional, artificial and social have been con-tinually contested and relocated.
No matter how determinedly we seek out the wild, we cannot hope to escape from our time- and culture-bound ways of seeing and interpreting, to encounter nature prior to all perceptual ordering and judgement. Even so-called ‘nature reserves’ contain not untrammelled nature, but a managed, culled, restricted nature, where access is controlled and where the observer is constantly guided, so that the supposedly natural spaces are rendered just as much ‘hybrids’ between the social and natural as those areas that ecologists deplore for the human destruction wrought in them.21 Even when ecologists and naturalists venture into ‘virgin’ territory, the object of their observations is not raw nature, but nature meas-ured and graded, classified and tagged, registered and simplified. When we consider our present-day forms of representation - photographic, cinematographic, holographic - it is hard to avoid the feeling that they have an unprecedented tendency to cut us off from the natural world. Such simulacra are unambiguously


The natures of cultural history 13


representational: despite their intensity and reality they bear few, if any, traces of the material objects and the human labour that went into them. Rather, their impact depends largely on their suc-cess in conveying the scientific sophistication of their making. The more engaging and convincing the images, the more the viewer is led to take on trust the reliability and authority of scientists and their technologies. In representing nature past and present, such ‘hyper-real’ images displace and supplant it.22
Through historical studies we can hope to regain the natural and human worlds that we are in danger of losing, as we uncover the ways in which humans have worked on natural objects to produce knowledge of nature. Thus we may gain a more critical under-standing of our own concerns and dealings with nature. None shall lift the veil of Isis, Goddess of Nature,,declared the ancient oracle. But Novalis tells us that one - a historian, no doubt - did succeed, only to see ‘wonder of wonders, himself’.23


9


I Curiosity, erudition and utility

f




WILLIAM B. ASHWORTH, Jr.
— i ?


2 Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance

Natural history in the Renaissance was an area of study that bore little resemblance to our modern notions of the discipline. Renais-sance natural historians had reasons for studying nature and ways of writing about nature that contrast strongly with our own. The Renaissance approach is wellworth understanding, since it sheds a great deal of light on Renaissance culture as a whole, but to appreciate it properly we must put aside all preconceptions of what natural history should be and allow ourselves to encounter Renais-sance natural history on its own terms. We need to forget every-thing we know about zoology and comparative anatomy and tax-onomy and be willing to entertain approaches that seem to venture far beyond the pale of what we consider science. If we can manage this, however, we will be richly rewarded. The Renaissance view of the natural world was more densely layered and more intricately interwoven than ours, and it can be a great pleasure to reconstruct that view and perhaps dwell within its sight for a brief while.1
The best way to begin this reconstruction is to open a volume written in the sixteenth century, by someone who claims to be a natural historian, and that purports to be about the natural world, and read what it has to say. There are a number of such works to choose from, although you could store them all in a modest-sized bookcase. Most of the volumes are large folios, forbidding in their bulk, but that is not surprising since they often survey all of nature between their covers. However, we need not read an entire work, at least not initially. One chapter ought to be enough, provided that we read it all (not just the parts that look familiar) and that we resist the temptation to judge until we are through.

Gesner and the fox
So that we get the most representative picture possible, let us choose a selection from the most widely read of all Renaissance natural histories, the Historia animalium of Conrad Gesner (1516— 65). It was published in four volumes in Zurich between 1551 and 1558, with the first volume discussing live-bearing quadrupeds, and the succeeding volumes treating egg-laying quadrupeds, birds,

17



i8 William B. Ashworth


Figure 2.1 Fox. Woodcut from Conrad Gesner, Historia Animalium Lib. I (Zurich, 1551), p. 1081.



and aquatic animals.2 Let us look at the chapter on vulpis, the fox, which we encounter near the end of volume one.3 It is a sizeable essay of sixteen folio pages, and if it were reset to fit into this volume, it would occupy at least sixty pages. One notices, immedi-ately, that it begins with a woodcut illustration, and a most hand-some one at that (Figure 2.1). In fact, most of the articles in Ges- ner’s History contain illustrations, and their naturalism and attractiveness have been often remarked upon. We will return to say more about these woodcuts, but first it is the text that will occupy our attention.4
The chapter is divided up into eight sections, lettered A through H (nearly every chapter, it will turn out, is sectioned in an ident-ical manner). In section A, a brief paragraph, we learn about names: that vulpis in French is ‘regnard’, in English, ‘fox’, in Dutch, ‘vos’; further equivalents are given for a large number of ancient and modern languages. In section B we learn about regional differences in foxes: for example, that foxes in Russia tend to be black rather than red, and those in Spain are often white. Foxes everywhere, however, share one attribute in common: their large bushy tails.
In succeeding sections we learn about the fox’s daily habits and movements, its different cries and calls, its relationships with other animals, its diet, its suitability as a source of food or medicine, and more. And as we slowly move through these long paragraphs we gradually become aware of Gesner’s basic method for learning about nature: quite simply, he read books, untold numbers of books, and he gathered from these texts and


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance


19


assembled on his pages the facts that he thought appropriate. It is not difficult to discover this, because Gesner pairs virtually every fox fact with a name, his source. So we read: ‘foxes are very ravenous in Sardinia, Aelian’, or ‘foxes die if they eat bitter almonds, Dioscorides’. There are over eighty different authorities cited in the fox article alone. Most of them are ancient authors; some, such as Aristotle and Albertus Magnus, are familiar names, but many more are minor literary figures that would be unknown to anyone except a dedicated specialist. It would seem, then, that Gesner was a competent classical scholar, that he read an astonish-ing number of obscure books, and that he preferred ancient authority over modern. It is also apparent that, for Gesner, natural history was a discipline forged in the library with the bibliographic tools of the scholar, rather than an observational science built up by a direct personal encounter with nature. To use a term that is commonly applied to those in the Renaissance who believed that the best answers were usually found in the writings of antiquity, Gesner was a humanist and, in his eyes at least, natural history was, first and foremost, a humanist pursuit.5

Fables and folklore
As we continue our reading, another impression becomes inescap-able. There are some very odd facts here, and many of them sit very uneasily in the organizational cubbyholes that Gesner has pro-vided for them. For example, section C is purportedly on the habits and voice of the fox. Gesner informs us that the fox’s yelp is so distinctive that the Romans invented a special word for it - ‘gannire’ - and Gesner goes so far as to provide examples from Terence and Plautus as to how this verb was applied metaphor-ically to men who tend to yelp at others. The same section informs us that the fox does not make its own den but rather relies on one built by the badger, whom the fox drives away by depositing excrement at the entrance. Still in the same paragraph we are told that in northern countries the fox crosses frozen rivers very deliber-ately, listening carefully for the sounds of cracking ice, and it is so good at finding a passage that other inhabitants of these regions will only cross where the fox does. And it goes on: the fox is often bothered by flies and gnats, but it relieves its torment by taking a mouthful of hay and immersing itself slowly in water until all the insects have taken refuge in the hay, which the fox then quickly releases. The fox will often cover itself in red clay and lie on its back as if dead; crows and ravens, delighting in the death of their enemy, will land on the carcass in triumph, only to be devoured. Sometimes the fox will bury its nose in the mud and raise its tail


20 William B. Ashworth


into the shape of a bird’s neck, creating a strange avian form that other birds are compelled to investigate, and they too become fodder for the fox. And still it goes on.
What are we to make of this barage of folktales and myths? Why are such stories here, in a work of natural history? One might choose to believe, as many commentators have, that Gesner was simply a lousy natural historian; that for all his humanistic fervor he patently lacked the common sense to discriminate between fact and fiction. But such a conclusion makes a dangerous presuppo-sition about natural history; it assumes that good natural history consists only of true facts, and that a natural history containing mythical or apochryphal information is somehow inferior. But per-haps Gesner did not feel that way. Perhaps he thought that a proper essay on the fox would include not only information on the fox’s name, size and appearance, but also every fox folktale, every vulpine myth, every reynardian legend that has come down to us. Perhaps Gesner believed that such tales reveal to us a great deal about the place of animals in human culture, and that one of the goals of natural history, perhaps the supreme goal, is to understand the intricate web of relationships that interconnect humans and ani-mals. I would venture that this latter intrepretation makes much more sense of Gesner’s natural history. Gesner used every available thread because he was trying to weave the richest tapestry possible. And if we can just accept that as a viable approach to natural his-tory, and step back for a moment and behold his creation, we realize that, by those terms, Gesner was eminently successful. The fabric he wove is indeed quite wondrous to behold.6
Adages and emblems
And if we can hold on to our new tolerance for a moment longer and return to Gesner’s fox chapter, we can now attempt to come to grips with a section that we have avoided until now, the mysteri-ous section H that concludes each and every animal chapter. If earlier sections have perplexed some because they seem to be com-partments over-filled with facts of doubtful value, this final section can be downright disturbing, because many will not even recognize the compartment. Gesner does not label his sections except for the letters, but if we had to think of a title for section H, the best might be ‘Associations’ - all those ways in which animals and their attributes have intruded themselves into our language, literature, and art. For most animals in Gesner’s work, H is the largest sec-tion of all, and so it is for the fox. We find, for example, a com-plete listing of fox epithets: crafty, sly, cunning, deceitful, each one supported by a plethora of classical quotations. We find a lexi-con of all the meanings that ‘foxy’ can have as an adjective. Gesner


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 21


provides us with instances of the fox as metaphor: Christ, for example, called Herod a fox because of the guile he displayed. We learn about the fox as omen: that it is bad luck to encounter a newborn fox on the path. Gesner lists all the appearances of the fox in Scripture, such as Matthew 8: foxes have holes, and birds have nests, but Christ has no place to lay his head. If the fox had appeared in pagan mythology, or in Egyptian hieroglyphics, that would be recounted here (the fox, it so happens, is absent from both, but many other animals had some status as hieroglyphs or mythological symbols and this is duly discussed in the appropriate section H). We are treated to several pages of fox proverbs: ‘a fox takes no bribes’; ‘he is yoking foxes’; and many more.
Finally, after six full pages of fox associations, we encounter, without a word of explanation, the following four-line paragraph. I'will translate it in full: ‘Mind is worth more than beauty. A fox, entering the workshop of a stage-manager, came upon a smoothly polished mask of a human head, so elegantly fashioned that although it lacked breath, it appeared to be alive in other respects. When the fox took the mask in its paws, it said: What a fine head this is, but it has no brain. Alciati, in his Emblemata.’ This would seem a fitting finale, in its strangeness, to what seems to be, initially, a very odd set of passages about the fox and its symbolic meanings.
A modern reader’s initial encounter with a Gesnerian section H can be a most unsettling experience. The earlier sections, with their wealth of animal fables and folklore, might be made tolerable even to a critic, for whether you view it as good or bad natural history, it is still natural history. But section H seems to have for-saken natural history altogether. It resembles a vast exercise in philology, linguistics, literary criticism, and biblical exegesis that has little to do with the study of nature. At least in the other sec-tions we can recognize the authorities and admit their relevance: Aristotle, Pliny, Aelian, Dioscorides, and Albert the Great all earned laurels as students of nature. But in section H we encounter Suidas and Planudes, Horapollo and the Greek Anthology, Erasmus and Alciati, most of whom you will not recognize, and none of whom you would expect to encounter in any history of natural history. The easiest way to resolve the paradox of section H is simply to ignore it as inconsequential or idiosyncratic, and that is precisely what most commentators have done. But should we do so? If Gesner saw fit to devote six of his sixteen fox pages to epithets, icons, proverbs, and emblems, should we not allow for the possibility that, in the mid-sixteenth century, knowledge of animal symbolism was considered an essential aspect of natural history?
I would like to suggest that such was the case - that Gesner


22 William B. Ashworth


lived in an age that delighted in the allegorical and the adagial and that regarded symbolic meanings as anything but inconsequential. Since we now live in an era that is profoundly uninterested in and uninformed about proverbs and emblems, entertaining such a pos-sibility takes a considerable leap of faith. But we really ought to make the effort, if we truly wish to understand Renaissance natural history. And it would help if we were better aware of two literary giants of the Renaissance, Erasmus and Alciati, who respectively made proverbs and emblems an integral part of Renaissance culture.

Erasmus and Alciati
Most people are familiar with Desiderius Erasmus as a prominent figure of the Reformation, but it can be a surprise to learn that in his own day he was more esteemed as the compiler of a vast annotated encyclopaedia of proverbs, the Adages. First issued in 1500 and greatly enlarged over the next thirty years, the Adages in its final form contained nearly four thousand proverbs, each with a running commentary by Erasmus, who was easily in Gesner’s league as an indefatigable classical scholar.7 Not surprisingly, many of the Erasmian proverbs feature animals: ‘owls to Athens’, ‘the tired ox treads more firmly’, ‘let sleeping dogs lie’. If we browse through Erasmus with an eye focused on foxes, we discover many delightful adages: ‘the fox is given away by his Brush [tail]’ (a variant on the more familiar proverb, ‘the lion is known by his claw’); ‘an old vixen is never caught in a trap’; ‘the fox knows many ways, the hedgehog one really good one’; as well as ‘a fox takes no bribes’ and the others that we already encountered in Gesner. And we must admit that the Erasmian proverbs collec-tively and effectively sum up what the fox has always symbolized in human culture: cleverness, craftiness, and the ability to learn from experience. In Gesner’s opinion, and in the view of most of his contemporaries, such proverbs tell us as much, if not more, about the fox as details about the shape of its ears or the size of its litter.
Andrea Alciati is less familiar to most of us than Erasmus, although we have already encountered him in passing, for Gesner ended his fox chapter with a quotation from Alciati’s Emblemata. The Emblemata was a book of emblems, the first book of emblems, since Alciati himself invented the genre. As Alciati envisioned it, an emblem is the combination of a short (and preferably obscure) motto, an image (also preferably obscure), and an explanatory epigrammatic poem. The emblem was intended to first mystify, and then delight, as the separate elements of word and icon, assisted by the explanatory poem, combined with illumi-


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 23


nating clarity to convey a clever truth. The Emblemata was first published in 1531, and it proved to be immensely popular, unbelievably popular, going through many editions and enlarge-ments, and then spawning in turn a host of imitators. By the end of the century there were literally hundreds of different emblem books, containing tens of thousands of emblems.8 The idea of the emblem fitted perfectly with a Renaissance spirit that treasured symbolic meanings and hidden truths, and it is no exaggeration to call the last half of the sixteenth century the Age of the Emblem, since emblems infiltrated virtually every aspect of Renaissance culture. Natural history was no exception. Many of Alciati’s emblems utilized animals. For example, one emblem shows a lynx standing over a newly killed deer while gazing at a flock of sheep in the background. The motto is ‘Forgetfulness is the parent of poverty’, and the epigram tells us to be careful not to neglect the present while looking for greater things in the future. Similarly, we can find in Alciati an image of hares cavort-ing about a dead lion, symbolizing courage in the absence of danger, and an emblem of a chameleon, representing flattery, because it can change its colours to fit the situation. Not surpris-ingly, we can find a fox in Alciati, sitting up and gazing at a human mask that it holds in its hands (Figure 2.2). The motto tells us that the mind is worth more than beauty, and the epigram, which we have already quoted in full as the concluding paragraph of Gesner’s fox chapter, might be boiled down to the query: what good is an empty head?9
Depending on your point of view, it is either fortunate or unfortu-nate that Gesner worked at the very beginning of the Age of Emblems, for his only emblematic source was Alciati; had he pub-lished his History of Animals fifty years later, section H could have been much more swollen with emblematic material. For it is clear that the idea of the emblem captured the very essence of Gesner’s view of nature: that the natural world is a complex matrix of seem-ingly obscure symbols and hidden meanings, which can suddenly become clear in a burst of illumination, if only you view it from enough different angles. Gesner’s text was so thorough and so all- embracing because it was necessary to cover all these angles, if one is to ensure complete understanding.
The role of the illustration
I hope that our encounter with one tiny portion of Gesner’s text has elicited the outlines of a view of nature that, while different from our own, is nevertheless fully self-consistent, and compatible with the other cultural traditions of the Renaissance that we have discussed. But our picture of Gesner’s natural history is still


24 William B. Ashworth


i



Figure 2.2 Fox emblem. Woodcut from Andrea Alciati, Emblematum libellus (Paris, 1534), p. 52.

Jngrc/fa autis m Chetai
tórè expefiìam m'wmt tow..
Sw Jiritus
‘ S&liwt 4ecfj*et^c.teri$ MimfecteU ldi%4 chs fmpfiffèt b Roc ccrcbntm .on fakt.

incomplete, for we have yet to consider some of the truly novel features that Gesner, uniquely, brought to the writing of natural history, and that, ultimately, would have as great an impact as his emblematic view of nature.
The first novelty is the incorporation of a visual image to sup-plement the text. We tend to take it for granted that books about animals should contain pictures of those animals, but there was very little precedent for this in classical natural history - Aristotle, Pliny, and Aelian were purely textual sources, as was Albertus, and whether in manuscript or printed form their texts were hardly ever accompanied by images of the animals under discussion. Gesner, however, illustrated practically every animal he discussed, using for the most part very fine woodcuts. The printed text had never seen the like of his impish fox or his droll hedgehog (Figure 2.3).
The reasons for Gesner’s decision to include not only pictures, but naturalistic pictures, are not immediately obvious. There was


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 25




Gesner, Hisioria Animalium

Figure 2.3 Hedgehog. Woodcut from Conrad

Lib. 1 (Zurich, 1551), p. 400.

one genre of animal books that had commonly been illustrated, namely the medieval bestiary, and since the bestiary was primarily a book of animal symbolism, and since Gesner was so interested in animal symbols himself, one might wonder whether he found inspiration in one of those beautiful illuminated bestiary manu-scripts that were so widely scattered around the libraries of Europe.10 But the possibility, initially tantalizing, is really unten-able. Bestiary illustrations, for all their charm and beauty, were highly stylized, and often unrecognizable as to species; and they usually depicted the animal engaged in the act that gave it import-ance as a symbol, so that the bear is depicted licking its unformed cubs into shape, and the pelican is shown nourishing its young from its bloody breast. Had Gesner used the bestiary as his model, then surely his fox would have been lying on its back, covered with mud, and enticing the birds from the trees, as it customarily did in the bestiary. Moreover, the bestiary tradition is no help in explaining why Gesner wanted illustrations that were naturalistic.
Another possibility is that Gesner was inspired by the animal images in an early printed book that is better known to botanists, namely the Gart der Gesundheit (‘Garden of Health’) (Mainz, 1485). The Gart, as it is usually called, was the first printed book to con-tain illustrations drawn from life by an artist, and these woodcuts are a notable improvement over the copybook specimens that one usually finds in herbals.11 The Gart is primarily a book of med-icinal remedies, and consequently most of the new illustrations are of plants, but there are a few animals of medicinal value that man-aged to creep in, and these woodcuts, while still relatively crude, belong to a completely different artistic world from their prede-cessors. The fox of the Gart is, I would suggest, a worthy ancestor to Gesner’s smirking vixen (Figure 2.4).


26 William B. Ashworth


Figure 2.4 Fox. Woodcut from Gart der Gesundheit (Mainz, 1485), ch. 426.



Qttlpt. ff.ftifttl ORttiW
i&gatf.. rtyntp￡￡￡ v&i

A third possibility is that Gesner was influenced by some of the late classical manuscripts that he consulted while compiling his natural history. Late classical manuscripts are quite different in appearance from medieval manuscripts or early printed texts, because the illustrations, when they are present, are quite natural-istic. As one might imagine, such manuscripts are very scarce, but we know that Gesner studied at least one, a Greek manuscript of Oppian’s Cynegetica (c. 217 AD) that is now in Venice. This manu-script is beautifully illustrated, and the representations of animals are quite wonderfully rendered. We know Gesner was taken by the images, because he copied two of them for inclusion in his Historia animalium: the hyena and the ichneumon (Figure 2.5). One might well imagine that he found the Oppian manuscript so attractive, with its regular use of lifelike illustrations, that he used it as model for his own work.12
However, it is probable that the major inspiration for Gesner’s decision to give zoology a visual component came from the botan-ical revolution of the 1530s. The appearance of the Herbarum vivae eicortes (‘Living Images of Plants’) (Strasbourg, 1530) by Otto Brunfels (c. 1489-1534) marked a watershed in natural history illustration, since all of the large woodcuts were based on watercol-ours drawn from life by an artist, Hans Weiditz (before 1500-c. 1536), who came out of the studio of the noted naturalistic painter, Albrecht Dtirer (1471-1528), of Nuremberg. The superiority of these images, and the value of their accuracy for the physician


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance

--------:---->--------------------------------------

DE ICHNEVM.ONE.
￡aw JnW,. tvittjb 0p￡io Vattfife M&nfwt,



Figure 2.5 Ichneumon. Woodcut from Conrad Gesner, Historia Animalium Lib. I (Zurich, 1551), p. 635. Gesner’s caption explains he found this image in a Greek manuscript of Oppian.

trying to identify medicinal plants, was immediately obvious, and before long every printed herbal not only contained pictures drawn from life, but trumpeted this fact as an advertisement from the very title-page.13 Gesner was a skilled botanist himself, and it may well be that having observed the success of naturalistic images in botany, he simply decided to do the same for books on animals. It is not quite so easy to assemble a portfolio of drawn-from-life images of animals, since many are exotic, and even the local ones cannot easily be persuaded to pose like plants. But Gesner, with the help of friends and correspondents, did manage to collect together the best available images of a large number of animals, and the face of natural history was changed forever as a result.

The problem of newly discovered animals
The second innovative feature of Gesner’s approach to natural his-tory, which in some ways is even more surprising than his insist-ence on accurate pictures, is that he included, and even sought out, information on new animals that were unknown to the great classical authorities. In an adventurer, novelty is often welcome, but in a classical scholar, especially a humanist scholar, it is not common to see a willingness to embrace evidence that undermines the authority of ancient heroes. It is to Gesner’s great credit that he made room in the classical menagerie for the exotic and classically unprecedented animals that were beginning to trickle in from the far north, the New World and the East Indies. Granted, there were not many of these in 1551, but Europe had discovered the oppos- sum, the guinea pig, and the bird of paradise, and Gesner included all of these, with illustrations, in his Historia animalium, even though he has to break with his carefully worked out format to


28 William B. Ashworth


do so. The opossum, after all, has no classical names, no references in Aristotle or Pliny, no network of fables built around it, no emblematic baggage. But Gesner welcomed the strange beast into his stable anyway.
Contemporary observers
Gesner’s welcome of the exotic is the result of a third innovation that is easily lost to view in the glare of his elegant woodcuts and clever proverbs. Gesner was willing to supplement his classical scholarship with observations and stories from contemporary observers. Olaus Magnus was the author of a book on the natural history of Scandinavia; Gesner mined this for the fact that some northern foxes have a black cross-shaped marking on their backs. Sebastian Münster was one of the great geographers of sixteenth- century Germany; Gesner learned from him what the foxes of Ger-many and Russia look like. Pierre Gilles (1490-1555) was a fellow humanist, who in 1532 published an edition of Aelian’s On Ani-mals, and who also wrote a book on the names of fish found in the Mediterranean. He was also a traveller who visited Constantin-ople and wrote a popular account of his visit. Gesner got his tidbit about the fox imitating a bird from Gilles’s book on fish (where he had inserted the story as a parenthetical parallel to the fishing frog, who attracts fish with a fleshy worm). The list could go on extensively. This abundance of new information from modern observers is one of the features that distinguishes Gesner’s natural history from all of its predecessors.14
Now we do have a relatively complete picture of Gesner’s natural history. And if we try, perhaps foolishly, to epitomize his achieve-ment, we might say that he established natural history as a human-ist discipline, firmly grounded in the writings of antiquity, but that he enriched it with the addition of a whole new world of emblem-atic and proverbial associations, a new concern for accurate pic-tures, and the incorporation of contemporary observations and new discoveries. The question we must now address is: what happened to natural history as a result of Gesner’s reformulation of the discipline?
The answer, as one might imagine, is complex, primarily because the innovations - emblems and proverbs, naturalistic images, and contemporary observations - lie rather uneasily along-side one another, and each would have the potential to pull sub-sequent natural history in different directions. Indeed, one can see a conflict arise in the subsequent work of Gesner himself. Gesner continued to gather information on quadrupeds, even after volume one of the Historia animalium was published, and this new infor-mation appeared as supplements to the later volumes, in separate epitomes that contained just the woodcuts, and finally in a German


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 29
” ----------------------------------->





Figure 2.6 Ichneumons. Woodcut from Conrad Gesner, Thierbuch (Zurich, 1551), fo. 115r.

abridgement of all four volumes that was published in 1563. If we follow an animal through these twelve years, we discover that most of Gesner’s supplements consist of new or better pictures of the animals. His fox woodcut could not really be improved upon, although he does acquire a picture of the northern cross-bearing fox and includes this in the appendices. His 1551 image of the ichneumon, we recall, was taken from the Oppian manuscript; in 1553 a picture from life was published, and Gesner added this to all later editions (Figure 2.6). The civet had been pretty well rep-resented in 1551, but Gesner was sent two more pictures sub-sequently, and he prints the better of the two in the 1563 German abridgement. Similarly, Gesner was continually on the lookout for new animals. When André Thevet (1504-92) published his Les Singularilez de la France Antarctique in 1557, Gesner immediately plundered it for images of the sloth and the toucan, and by 1563 he had added a large contingent of new and exotic animals to his original few. There were many new emblem books published in the late 1550s, but Gesner does not seem to have mined them to enrich the emblematic associations of his animals. Apparently the desire to have accurate images, and images of new animals, came to take precedence over the desire to place an animal in a more complex emblematic environment.


30 William B. Ashworth


Belon and Rondelet
One sees a different trend in the work of two contemporaries, Pierre Belon (1517-64) and Guillaume Rondelet (1507-66). Neither scholar aspired to write a comprehensive encyclopaedia of the natural world, but in the more limited spheres in which they worked - Rondelet on fish, Belon on birds, fish, and exotic ani-mals - each placed great stress on personal observation. Both were trained in humanist natural history, but neither paid much atten-tion in their published works to classical authority, except for Aristotle, and neither had the slightest interest in the emblematic view of nature. But like Gesner, Belon and Rondelet were insistent that narrative be accompanied by. pictures ‘drawn from life’. In fact, the importance of lifelike image is now so paramount that it is explicitly stated on the title-pages of all their works; Belon’s 1553 book on fish carries the sub-title: ‘with pictures that are likenesses from life’ j while Rondelet’s 1554 study of marine life carries a simi-lar continuation: ‘in which true likeness of fish are given’. One can see why Belon and Rondelet have emerged as heroes to modern zoologists, for their narrow approach to natural history is much more akin to ours than the grand vision of Gesner.15
The flowering of emblematic natural history
It would be a great mistake, however, to think that some kind of transformation occurred here - that Gesner’s grand emblematic natural history somehow withered in the face of a more obser-vational approach, thanks to Rondelet and Belon, and perhaps even the late Gesner. In truth, it was the Belori/Rondelet vision that faded, for almost a full century, and the emblematic view that flourished. We can see this in the simple fact that it was Gesner’s encyclopaedia that was reprinted in 1604 and again in 1617-20 and once again as late as 1669. None of the zoological works of Ron-delet or Belon went through subsequent printings. We can see it also in the growing popularity of animal emblems in the last half of the sixteenth century. More and more animals were woven into the emblematic fabric, even some of the newly discovered ones, and the trend was so powerful that by 1595 it was possible to pub-lish a work that would have gladdened Gesner’s heart: Sym- bolorum & emblematum ex animalibus quadrupedibus desumtorum Cen-turia altera . . . (‘Another Century of Symbols and Emblems Derived from Quadruped Animals’) by Joachim Camerarius (1534-98).
Camerarius’s book contains one hundred emblems of animals; it was the second of four volumes which altogether contained four


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance


E I D E E T DIE
FIDE.



Figure 2.7 Emblem of the fox on ice. Engraving from Joachim Camerarius, Symbolarum et emblematum . . . centuria altera (Nuremberg, 1595), no. 55, fo. 57r.

hundred emblems of plants, insects, and birds, as well as ani-mals.16 Each emblem is illustrated with an exquisite engraving, but in addition to the requisite motto and epigram we have a full page of scholarly commentary provided for each emblem. The commen-tary shows us that Camerarius was as well versed in Aristotle and Gesner as he was in Alciati and Erasmus. Camerarius offered emblems for familiar animals, such as hedgehogs and bears, and for less familiar ones, such as ichneumons, chameleons, and even opossums. The fox has no less than three emblems, and it is instructive that all three are brand new, invented by Camerarius, which certainly shows us the vitality of emblematic natural history in the 1590s. The first (emblem 55) shows a fox crossing a frozen river while listening to the ice, with the motto: ‘Trust and mistrust’ (Figure 2.7). The story of the vigilant fox, we might recall, is told by Gesner, who in turn found it in Pliny. The second (56) shows a fox sneering at the attempts of two hounds to catch it, and the motto is: ‘Security without fear’. The text relates that a pregnant vixen is so clever that it is rarely caught; the story originated in Aristotle, became a proverb in Erasmus, and was of course duly quoted by Gesner. The third emblem (57) shows a badger trying


William B. Ashworth


Figure 2.8 Emblem of the fox and badger. Engraving from Joachim Camerarius, Symbolarum et emblematum . . . centuria altera (Nuremberg, 1595), no. 57, fo. 59r.



to get into its den, which is occupied by a fox (Figure 2.8). The motto is: ‘What you want, another has’. This emblem, too, was fashioned from a tale, found in Gesner, that goes all the way back to antiquity.
Camerarius’s emblem book has been virtually ignored by his-torians of natural history, but in fact it is very much a work of natural history in the Gesnerian tradition.17 It is not irrelevant that Camerarius was an extremely competent botanist and published several botanical works that are highly regarded. Yet he clearly felt that the purpose of studying nature was not just to describe and illustrate, but also to create and illuminate and uncover new mean-ings in the natural world. If Gesner’s natural history planted the seeds of the emblematic approach to nature, then the emblem books of Camerarius mark the true flowering of emblematic natural history.


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 33


Aldrovandi and the fruition of emblematic natural history
As a final demonstration of the power of emblematic natural his-tory in the late Renaissance, let us turn to the work of Ulisse Ald-rovandi (1522-1605).18 Aldrovandi taught at Bologna and pub-lished the first of what would ultimately be a thirteen-volume encyclopaedia of natural history in 1599; and from the date it is easy to imagine Aldrovandi as several generations removed from Gesner and the other zoologists who published in the mid-sixteenth century. In fact, Aldrovandi was only five years younger than Gesner and Belon, and he came out of precisely the same cultural milieu. He just had the good fortune to live forty years longer than his contemporaries. He was seventy-seven years old when his first volume, on birds, was published, and he lived to see three more volumes printed before his death. Fortunately, his literary execu-tors ensured that his remaining manuscripts were published more or less as Aldrovandi envisioned them. The first quadruped volume appeared in 1616, with another in 1621 and the last in 1637. It is in this later volume, the De quadrupedibus digitalis viviparis (‘History of Live-bearing Quadrupeds with Claws’), that we encounter, once again, our friend, the fox.19
Aldrovandi’s article is twenty-eight folio pages long, which makes for an impressive looking package. What is initially most impressive, however, is the illustration: it shows, not the external appearance of the fox, but its skeleton (Figure 2.9). And indeed, the section in which it is embedded is titled ‘Anatomica’, a term we hardly ever encounter in Gesner. Here at last is a naturalist who is looking beyond surface features for more significant infor-mation, such as the details of anatomical structure.
Or so it might seem. Aldrovandi did indeed make many anatom-ical studies of animals, and he was one of the very first to do so, and woodcuts of skeletons of various specimens are scattered throughout his encyclopaedia. It is quite proper that he be given credit for this. Aldrovandi also introduced a number of new illus-trations into his volumes, such as an improved ichneumon (Figure 2.10), and he kept a stable of artists busy furnishing pictures of animals drawn from life. However, it would be a real mistake to conclude that by taking an interest in comparative anatomy, or in improving illustrations, Aldrovandi was somehow turning his back on the emblematic approach as developed by Gesner. One has only to read some of the other section headings of Aldrovandi’s fox arti-cle to be rapidly disabused of this notion. After shorter sections on Names, Habits, Voice, Food (and Anatomy), we find sections


34 William B. Ashworth




Figure 2.9 Fox skeleton. Woodcut from Ulisse Aldrovandi, De quadrupedibus digitalis viviparis (Bologna, 1637), p. 198.

on Antipathies and Sympathies, Physiognomy, Epithets, Emblems and Symbols, Fables, Hieroglyphics, Proverbs, Allegories, Morals, Omens, and Symbolic Images, to name just some of the headings.
What Aldrovandi has done is not to break away from emblem-atic natural history, but rather to expand the emblematic world of animals by adding in all the new emblems, adages, and images that appeared in the half-century after Gesner. In the paragraph on Emblems, for example, we find not only the one Aleiati emblem that Gesner had already extracted, but two of the thrfee from Cam- erarius, as well as two further examples from other emblem books that we have not discussed. Gesner had limited knowledge of Egyptian hieroglyphics, since only the short text of Horapollo was available in 1551, but Aldrovandi had access to Piero Valeriano’s prodigious Hieroglyphica, an exhaustive commentary on Egyptian symbolism that was first published in 1556, and he drew on it fre-quently. Aldrovandi also had the advantage of being able to consult Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia, a fascinating work first published in 1593 that described accepted ways of personifying such abstract con-cepts as Truth or Nature. Many personifications involved animals, so that Arrogance, according to Ripa, was represented by a woman


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 35




Figure 2.10 Ichneumon. Woodcut from Ulisse Aldrovandi, De quadrupedibus digitatis viviparis (Bologna, 1637), p. 301.

holding a peacock, while Natural Instinct was to be personified by a youth trying to prevent a weasel from entering the mouth of a toad. Aldrovani was very fond of Ripa’s constructions, and in the Personification section of the fox article we learn that a pair of foxes is one of the attributes of Christian faith, where they represent the heretics that must be converted. Aldrovandi could also utilize Giovanni Battista della Porta’s De humana physiognomonia, pub-lished in 1586, which compared animal and human faces and argued that similarities in appearance reveal similarities in charac-ter. Porta has a great deal to say about the vulpine personalities of people with long noses and close-set eyes, and if you do not wish to consult Porta, you can find it all neatly digested in Aldrovandi.
Aldrovandi’s real achievement, then, was in bringing the emblematic view of nature to fruition. In his many volumes he was able to weave a richer fabric than Gesner ever envisioned, because he had more threads and colours to work with, and if you believe that the goal of natural history is to capture the entire web of associations that inextricably links human culture and the animal world, then Aldrovandi’s natural history was remarkably successful.
The collapse of emblematic natural history
Fifty years after Aldrovandi’s death, the emblematic view of nature would collapse. Natural history would suddenly take on a more familiar form, as naturalists abandoned the entire associative framework and began to focus on description and anatomical inves-tigation, with the ultimate goal of a natural system of classification.


36 William B. Ashworth


Conjectures as to the cause of this demise have been offered, but we will not take up the problem here. Perhaps for this occasion we should adopt the position of Michel Foucault, who said that it simply happened; after .650, people abruptly ceased to think in terms of associations and similitudes as ordering principles of nature and began to look at the world in other ways.20
For the student of the Renaissance, the important point is not that emblematic history ultimately disappeared, but rather that for a full hundred years it flourished,'and indeed dominated attitudes toward nature. If we wish to study Gesner, or Aldrovandi, or Camerarius, and understand their works in the spirit in which they were written, then we must be prepared to think adagially, alle-gorically, and analogically. We must see an animal as a symbol, a character, in some greater language of nature. To paraphrase Galileo, if we wish to read the book of nature, we must first com-prehend the language and read the letters in which it is composed. In the late Renaissance, that book was written in the language of emblems, and if you do not read that language there is little that will make any sense.
Further reading
Ackerman, James S., ‘Early Renaissance “naturalism” and scientific illus-tration’, in Allan Ellenius (ed.), The Natural Sciences and the Arts (Uppsala, 1985), pp. 1-17.
Ashworth, William B., J?., ‘Natural history and the emblematic world view’, in David C. Lindberg and Robert S. Westman (eds.), Re-appraisals of the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 303-32.
Copenhaver, Brian P., ‘A tale of two fishes: magical objects in natural history from antiquity to the scientific revolution’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 52 (1991), pp. 373~98-
Delaunay, Paul, La Zoologie au seizième siècle, Histoire de la pensée, 7 (Paris, 1962).
Doggett, Rachel, Dunnington, Jean and Miller, Jean, Fabulous Beasts: Re-naissance Animal Lore (exhibition catalogue) (Washington, DC, 1993).
Findlen, Paula, Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific Cul-ture in Early Modem Italy (Berkeley, 1994).
Foucault, Michel, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sci-ences (New York, 1970).
Friedmann, Herbert, A Bestiary for Saint Jerome: Animal Symbolism in European Religious Art (Washington, DC, 1980).
George, Wilma, Animals and Maps (Berkeley, 1969).
Gmelig-Nijboer, Caroline Aleid, Conrad Gesner’s Historia Animalium: An
Inventory of Renaissance Zoology (Meppel, 1977).
Harms, Wolfgang, ‘On natural history and emblematics in the sixteenth century’, in Allan Ellenius (ed.), The Natural Sciences and the Arts (Uppsala, 1985), pp. 67-83.


Emblematic natural history of the Renaissance 37


Koreny, Fritz, Albrecht Diirer and the Animal and Plant Studies of the Renaissance, trans. Pamela Marwood and Yehuda Shapiro (Boston, 1988).
Praz, Mario, Studies in Seventeenth-Century Imagery, 2 vols., Studies of the Warburg Institute (London, 1939-47).
Raven, Charles E., English Naturalists from Neckham to Ray: A Study of the Making of the Modem World (Cambridge, 1947).
Thomas, Keith, Man and the Natural World: Changing Attitudes in England 1500-1800 (London, 1983).


ANDREW CUNNINGHAM

3 The culture of gardens

The garden
God once planted a garden eastward in Eden: and there he put / the man whom he had formed, to dress it and to keep it. God
walked in this garden in the cool of the day. But man ate the for-bidden fruit of the tree of knowledge and God expelled him from this garden. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, God said to Adam, in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; and God sent
Adam forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from which God had made him.
God never made another garden. In the Christian tradition all other gardens have been made by man seeking, often, to recreate that half-remembered half-imagined Paradise, and to remove God’s curse from the ground.
Thus all gardens except that first Eden are the result of human art and skill: they are Nature re-arranged by artifice. Within the garden an aesthetic prevails: beauty is constructed from rearrang-ing Nature. Such rearrangement needs unremitting work; all gardens need the constant nurturing hand of the gardener. The gardener’s work preserves their identity as gardens, and keeps them from slipping back into non-gardens. If the garden falls into neglect all the vistas become overgrown, the exotic introductions fail, and the land is ‘recolonized’ by native plants.
Dirt, says Mary Douglas, is matter in the wrong place. Gardens, one might say, are Nature put into the right place. And that place is an enclosed place. For all gardens are spaces delimited, areas which man has artificially enclosed, with either a physical or visual boundary. The boundary is essential. Even when the garden is intended to portray an unbounded landscape, there are boundaries, visual and physical, between garden landscape and landscape land-scape. Within the wall there is order and cultivation, outside there is wildness. Inside there is rationality, care and nurturing, outside there is Nature raw and savage. Inside there is art, outside there is Nature. Brought within the wali, the weak can be made strong by preferential growing conditions; but if a plant should ‘escape’ over the wall (as gardeners say) and into the world, then what

38



The culture of gardens 39


inside the garden had been treasured and pampered, outside its walls becomes a nuisance and a weed.

God and the garden
Gardens are spiritual places, and always have been, in both the Western and Eastern garden traditions. Paradise is a word adopted into Greek from old Persian, where it meant ‘an enclosed park or garden’. This equation is very important. Paradise is a garden: a garden is a paradise. We can make a paradise on earth by making a garden. And the central function of this paradise is spiritual, pri-marily that of contemplation and spiritual renewal; and it is also a place for mystical thinking. A garden is a place of peace and harmony, a place to promote and reflect spiritual well-being, a place where there is refreshment for the soul.
What is most interesting about this from a modern perspective, and particularly from the perspective of the naturalist, is that gard-ens and gardeners were not particularly concerned with plants, which is probably the first thing that we think of today with respect to gardens, with our passion for planting in our own little paradises.
The first garden in the Judaeo-Christian tradition was a Paradise, and an enclosed one: the garden or paradise of Eden. Adam and Eve were thrown out of this garden, and the attempt to get back to it can, perhaps, be characterized as the point of Christianity. The only things which the Garden of Eden contained, that are mentioned in Genesis, are a river to water it, which divides into four streams as it leaves the garden, and trees: ‘all trees pleas-ant to look at and good for food’. No other plants are mentioned.
The essential enclosedness of gardens is particularly important in the Christian tradition with respect to the cult of Mary. For the garden itself, as well as certain flowers (the lily and the rose), came to represent Mary and her virtues. St Bernard of Clairvaux suc-ceeded in showing that the unmistakably sexual garden imagery of the erotic poem ‘The Song of Songs’ (or Song of Solomon) in the Bible, actually referred to and celebrated asexuality: it was a paean to the chastity and purity of the Virgin Mary. This was the kind of expert exegesis which marked Bernard out clearly as a saint. Indeed, St Bernard managed to show that the Virgin was herself the ‘garden close-locked’ or hortus conclusus referred to in the Song of Songs. (In the Authorized Version it is ‘a garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed’.) As a consequence, much of the visual representation of gardens which we have from the Middle Ages is a product of this cult of Mary and her virginity, showing her as ‘a garden close-locked’ inside ‘a garden close-locked’ (Figure 3.1). This was, of course, centuries before Linnaeus joyfully


40 Andrew Cunningham



Figure 3.1 The Virgin Mary, ‘a garden close-locked’ inside ‘a garden close-locked’. From a Livre des chants royaux (15th century, Paris), Bibliothèque Nationale, MS. fr. 145.


The culture of gardens 41


showed that plants have sex, so the garden could quite reasonably be thought of as a sex-free zone.
In the Islamic tradition the garden as Paradise is, perhaps, even stronger, since the Koran describes heaven as a garden, a state of blessedness. The reward of the faithful will be to dwell in a garden with ‘spreading shade . . . fruits and fountains and pomegranates . . . and cool pavilions’. Again, flowing water is presented as an important element of a garden, but as in the Judaeo-Christian Eden, plants (as opposed to trees) are not par-ticularly important.
Islam was spread to the Persians, and reciprocally the Muslims adopted the Persian style of garden: so an Islamic garden is enclosed, it has flowing water, usually in water-courses, it has trees and aromatic plants, and often has buildings within it. The garden is often seen as the ‘soul’, compared to the ‘body’ of the building that it accompanies. When the Moguls went conquering to India, they took this model of Paradise garden with them: as a nomadic people they often established their tents within such gardens. Sur-viving examples of Islamic Paradise gardens include, in India, the Taj Mahal, the Red Fort in Delhi and, in Spain, the gardens of the Alhambra in Granada.
Philosophy and religion have always been close, separating in the West into contrasted spheres only in the last couple of centuries. The philosopher, the seeker of wisdom, has also customarily found his spiritual solace in the garden. In Antiquity the philosopher Democritus used his garden to practise philosophy and go mad in, and Hippocrates supposedly found him there ‘sitting upon a stone under a plane tree, without hose or shoes, with a book on his knees, cutting up several beasts, and busy at his study’.1 Much later, in 1625, another famous philosopher, Lord Chancellor Bacon (Francis Bacon) in England was to write an essay on gardens-fit-for-a-king, and created a more humble one himself. A garden, Bacon wrote, ‘is the purest of human pleasures. It is the greatest refreshment of the spirits of man’.
Power and the garden
This spiritual purpose, both religious and philosophical, was a pri-mary purpose in creating gardens, and it was a guide to what a garden should comprise and how it should be constructed and used. This spiritual dimension continued into Renaissance gardens and it was explicit in much discussion and planning of such gard-ens. Traditionally, historians have paid most attention to the appearance of new, additional motivations, interests and uses for gardens in the Renaissance, but it should be remembered that the spiritual role underlay all these innovations and outlasted some of them, and spiritu?1 refreshment is still a role of gardens today.


42 Andrew Cunningham
 > ;;
Two new kinds of garden were created in Renaissance Europe. Both exhibited a new enthusiasm for gardens as such, and this enthusiasm produced gardens on a new scale, in great numbers, and with new roles. Both new kinds of garden were attempts in some measure to recreate, to give new birth to, ancient practices. The practices being ‘reborn’ were those of the ancient Greeks and Romans, but as the ancient Greeks seemed to have had little interest in making gardens, attention was much more on the garden world of the ancient Romans. Literary evidence was the main source: garden creators had to read Latin.
The innovations that were made in attempting to copy the Anci-ents included the laying out of gardens using geometric shapes: perfect circles enclosing squares, enclosing circles, enclosing squares. Geometry =and proportion ruled, harmony prevailed. Classical-style buildings were erected in the garden. Classical statu-ary, both genuine and faked, was introduced into the garden in order to represent the classical gods and myths, as the Greek Ancients themselves had done in their groves. Fountains had adorned the gardens of the ancient Romans, and they had created grottoes and pergolas. The Ancients had had terracing in their gardens and theatres. It was learnt that they had planted trees in rows, had used grafting to create better trees, had employed topiary, and that they loved certain trees - the elm tree, the plane tree for shade, and the bitter-orange tree (melangolo) for ornament. All these were adopted into the new Renaissance gardens. And these new gardens were sometimes also constructed on the best understanding of Platonic philosophy, and were intended to reflect cosmological harmony.
The ancient Roman fascination with topiary, for instance, the Renaissance garden-makers learnt from the letters of Pliny the Younger, who had described his two gardens in letters to his friends in about ioo AD. His Tuscan villa garden was full of box clipped into animal shapes:
In front of the colonnade is a terrace laid out with box hedges clipped into different shapes, from which a bank slopes down, also with figures of animals cut out of box facing each other on either side. On the level below there is a bed of acanthus so soft one could say it looks like water. All round is a path hedged by bushes trained and cut into different shapes, and then a drive, oval like a racecourse, inside which are various box figures and clipped dwarf shrubs. The whole garden is enclosed by a dry-stone wall that is hidden from sight by a box hedge planted in tiers.2
This Tuscan garden of Pliny also had plane trees and gentle fountains.
The first of the new kinds of garden in the Renaissance was the


The culture of gardens 43


princely garden for the attention and the admiration of other people, rather .than kept closed (conclusus) for the personal spiritual refreshment of its princely owner and his friends. Like the palaces that they were concurrently constructing for themselves, these gar-dens were intended to say something about the power and import-ance of their princely creators.
It was a novel thing in early modern Western Europe to use a garden as a weapon in the game of social and political power. In accordance with the general Romantic characterization of the Renaissance, the princely gardens have usually been seen by his-torians as ‘gardens as works of art’, with the implicit assumption that a ‘work of art’ speaks for itself about the social claims of its owner. But it should be rather surprising that a garden, as a garden, could ,have been made into an effective way of making a statement about social standing and political ambition, especially given its history as a spiritual retreat. The first requirement in order for the garden to fill such a role was, naturally, that it had to be taken out of the closet: the enclosed garden had to be opened up to a wider audience. But in itself this was not enough; presen-tational skills were needed, and this is where the architect was brought in.
These power gardens were begun in the mid- to late-fifteenth century in Italy, by the rulers of the richer and more powerful city-states. Rome and Florence were the most important early centres. I shall concentrate here on one particular garden as exemplary of certain features of Renaissance princely gardens, one which has been described as one of the three most influential gardens in European history.3 It is also a particularly good one to choose as a source of the view of the garden as power dressing, since it concerns the political ambitions of one of the greatest of earthly princes of the Renaissance, the Pope. Moreover, it was two gardens in one.
These gardens were created by Pope Julius II (pope from 1503 to 1513), who was taking up in its entirety the scheme of an earlier Pope, Nicholas V (1447-55), to create an instauratio Romae: ‘The whole Vatican area was to form the imperial palace of the new Julius Caesar, imperator and pontifex maximus, an explicit celebration of the pope-emperor’.4 The important garden inno-vations were part of this imperial scheme of Julius II and, naturally enough, as they were intended to achieve imperial goals, so they were constructed on an imperial scale. The Renaissance garden, in its origin, was an instrument to make claims about power, as well as classical learning.
The two gardens that bore this weight of imperial ambition were part of the Belvedere Court, a vast, multilevel construction con-necting the papal palace to the Villa Belvedere up a little hill.5 It


44 Andrew Cunningham




Figure 3.2 Bramante, Belvedere Court in the Vatican Palace - original drawing, viewed from the primary viewpoint in the papal apartments. The important role of staircases, and the minimal role of plants, is clear from this sketch.

was designed by the papal architect, Donato Bramante (1444- 1514), first architect of the new St Peter’s. An enormous space, over 300 yards long and almost 100 yards wide, was designed with a great empty court at the lowest level serving as an open-air thea-tre, connected by spectacular stairways to two higher levels of formal gardens with box-outlined parterres and fountains (Figure 3.2). Following Bramante’s cue here, grand staircases were to be a leading feature of many later formal gardens. The point of this arrangement was to create a vista: the stairs and terraced gardens created a view which allowed the eye to see the whole garden as one great construction, and allowed the viewer to be impressed by the wealth, taste and learning of the owner of the garden. In the case of the Belvedere, the whole great court with its two levels of garden was designed to be seen at its best from one particular view-point in the papal apartments. To achieve this aim of making a visually dominant viewpoint, Bramante employed in his construc-tion that Renaissance innovation in the visual arts - linear perspec-tive - thus making the whole garden look like a Renaissance paint-ing and enable it also to be experienced like one. This is where it is important that this and other gardens of the rich and famous were designed by architects, those practitioners of a classical art of great importance as an art of persuasion, itself being resuscitated


The culture of gardens 45


according to ancient models and standards at this time. For archi-tects design deliberately to achieve particular visual effects, in order thereby to affect the emotions and opinions of the viewer and convey messages to him or her, in this case messages about the Pope’s cultivated appreciation of Antiquity, his claims to imperial power and the proper central role of the Pope in the modern, sixteenth-century, world. Although such architect- designed gardens, like the Belvedere Court, often include many of what are, in essence, horti conclusi, these enclosed gardens have now been brought out into the open, and the intention is always that the eye of the spectator should see beyond the separate enclosed-gardens-without-walls, and be led to the grand view or vista of the garden as a whole. The garden was now part of a bigger picture. . . , .
But there was another garden in the Belvedere Court, of equal importance and influence. This was a special enclosed garden, though on a grand scale (Figure 3.3). The distinctive thing about this garden was that in it ancient (that is, classical) sculpture was displayed. A Venetian visiting this garden in 1523 wrote:
One enters a very beautiful garden, of which half is filled with growing grass and laurels, mulberrys, and cypresses, while the other half is paved in squares of tiles, laid end on end, and in every square a beautiful orange tree grows out of the pavement, of which there are a great many, arranged in perfect order. In the centre of the garden there are two enormous men in marble; one opposite the other, twice life size, who lie in sleeping position. One is the Tiber, the other the Nile; very ancient figures, and two fountains issue from them. At the main entrance to this garden on the left there is a sort of chapel built into the wall where, on a marble base, stands the Apollo, world famous, a very beautiful and worthy figure, life size, of the finest marble. Somewhat further on . . . is the Laocoon, celebrated throughout the world . . . Not far from this . . . there is a lovely Venus of life size, nude, with a bit of drapery over her shoulder which partly covers her genitals: as beautiful a piece as it is possible to imagine.6
This garden was making many statements at once. It was dis-playing outstanding Greek statuary from the Roman imperial past as trophies of the new imperial claimant, the Pope; it was simul-taneously stepping beyond the tradition of the ancient Roman garden back to the Greeks, by adopting the ancient Greek practice of placing statuary in the groves where philosophers walked and talked.
This was the first of all the many statuary gardens in which antique statuary and inscriptions were displayed among the laurels and the bitter-orange trees. But it was never to be excelled. For the statues displayed in this garden were some of the most import-ant and beautiful of all statuary that has been recovered from the


46 Andrew Cunningham




Figure 3.3 The garden and sculpture garden in Bramante’s Belvedere Court, in the Vatican Palace. The court is here seen from the side, which is not a viewpoint intended by Bramante, and is potentially confusing. The enclosed sculpture garden is at the very top of the court, and is the walled structure on the right of . the picture, letter ‘I’: the ‘Giardino secreto doue e il lacoonte l’apollo et altre statue anticke’. A reclining river god, either the Tiber or the Nile, can just be discerned in it. The main entrance to this sculpture garden was up Bramante’s famous circular staircase, which is within the tower at the bottom right of the picture. The papal apartments are on the left of the picture, and the intended vista of the court was from the left of the picture toward the right. The various small papal gardens and wood in the background are not part of the Belvedere court, or of the intended vista. From Antoine Lefrery, Speculum Romanae Magnificentiae (Rome, 1574).

ancient world, and were to include what is possibly the greatest of all antique statues, the Belvedere torso - which Michelangelo used as a motif in his paintings for the Sistine Chapel, and of which he supposedly said, ‘Truly this was created by a man who was wiser than Nature! Pity that it is a torso.’ These statues had been discovered in Rome in the course of the developments that the papacy was making in order to rebuild the city as a renewed imperial centre under the rule of the Pope.
The Belvedere Court was never fully finished according to Bram-ante’s designs, and a later Pope, Pius V (1566-72), removed the statues from the statue garden, while at the end of the sixteenth century another Pope was to appropriate the higher-level garden


The culture of gardens 47


of the court to build the Vatican library. But the influence of these two Belvedere gardens was nevertheless immense, with respect to the purpose, scale and content of princely gardens.
The great princely gardens of Italy, France and England of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries all build on these features, adapted to the local terrain and circumstances. Such grand per- spectival vistas came to be typical of many subsequent gardens of Rome, especially those built by the numerous resident cardinals, and of other princely gardens of Italy. The French grand garden, by contrast, was generally on flatter ground, so it usually had lakes where the Italian gardens had fountains, and the garden was designed to be seen from the grand house or a raised walk or ter-race, with beds one looked down on. Versailles, with its great vistas and avenues, is such a garden on the very grandest scale. The patterned floral parterre, or bed, became the fundamental item of a French garden, and as its intricate pattern could be made equally well and more conveniently with coloured sands and tiles, the parterres in the grand gardens came at one time to have no flowers in them at all.7

Plants and the garden
The classical gods had now been introduced to the Paradise of the Christian tradition. The first great fashion of garden ornamentation of the sixteenth century had been for classical sculpture; the second was for increasingly extravagant and impressive fountains, and here the Tivoli gardens constructed by the Cardinal of Ferrara, Ippolito II d’Este, take the laurel and spectacularly outdo the ancient Romans at their own art of garden fountains. But still, even toward the end of the sixteenth century plants and flowers - their exotic allure, their variety of colour and shape, their beauty - were not particularly important. It was not until the seventeenth century that ‘the gardener came into his own as master of the garden, dim-inishing the role of the fontaniere’.8 Thus, perhaps surprisingly, the introduction of new plants into Europe through the voyages to the New World, had not in itself automatically led either to the creation of these princely gardens, or to their transformation into plant gardens.
The primary way in which gardens became full of plants was through the establishment of ‘physic’ or ‘botanic’ gardens. These gardens were first established in medical faculties of universities, and their initial aim was to improve the education of future doctors in the knowledge of the plants which made up the basis of most drugs. The first such gardens were created in the 1540s in Padua and Pisa, the universities of Venice and Florence respectively, and sometimes with a lectureship in the ‘simples’. Shortly after,


48 Andrew Cunningham


Figure 3.4 The Padua physic/botanic garden today: the garden is still on the original site and the beds are laid out in geometric patterns. The circular shape was thought most perfect for a garden, but in practice it gave no room for expansion, and Padua was one of the very few places where it was adopted.



gardens were established in Florence, Pavia, Ferrara, Bologna, Rome, Messina and other places in Italy.9 Elsewhere gardens were established more slowly: at Montpellier in 1598, in Paris (the Jardin Royal des Plantes Médicinales) in 1640. In Britain the Oxford Physic Garden was founded by a private benefaction from Sir John Danvers in 1621; the Chelsea Physic garden in London in 1673 to teach apothecary apprentices; the Edinburgh garden (now covered by Waverley Station) in the 1670s by two concerned doctors; the Cambridge garden not until 1763, though there had been earlier attempts.
The physic gardens were Renaissance gardens in two ways. First their arrangement was on the same principles as other gardens, and geometrical in layout. Padua, for instance, is a circle with squares inscribed, and circles within the squares; Oxford is square, subdiv-ided into squares. Second, their creation was linked to the attempt to recover something ancient: the medical plant lore described in the works of the ancient Greeks who wrote on plants and medi-cines: Dioscorides, Theophrastus and Galen.
Medicine (‘physic’) was the occasion for the making of these gardens, but their flourishing stemmed from the fact that they came to be run by people passionate about plants: ‘botanists’ in the root meaning of the Greek term, plant enthusiasts. A ‘botanic’ garden is a plant garden. In most physic gardens we find that the leading spirit was someone with primarily botanical interests, such as Luca Ghini in Pisa or Ulisse Aldrovandi at Bologna. Hence these gardens were used as a sort of depot for the collection,


The culture of gardens 49




Figure 3.5 Paris: Jardin Royal. The Jardin Royal, or Jardin du Roi, or Jardin des Plantes, was founded in Paris in 1640 with royal support, as a public pleasure garden as well as a physic garden. The moving spirit, Guy de la Brosse, was a physician in ordinary to Louis XIII. Lecturers were endowed in the garden on royal funds, and it was possible to obtain a virtually complete medical education there free. In the course of the French Revolution it became the Museum of Natural History (Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle), and in that guise still exists on its original site. From Guy de la Brosse, Description du jardin royal des plantes médicinales (Paris, 1636).

storage and distribution of new plants, and they were centres of correspondence and exchange networks. The aims of the keepers of these gardens (in contrast with those of the medical faculties who paid for the upkeep) came to be to use these gardens as places in which to assemble and culture all the plants in the world; the number of plants being, of course, constantly increased by intro-ductions from the New World. In this sense the gardens become living catalogues of plants, living catalogues of Creation. And in these Gardens of Eden, these plant paradises, the botanists tried


50 Andrew Cunningham




Figure 3.6 The growing and preparation of medicinal herbs, from the physic garden to the patient; the distilling process, to extract the medically active essences of plants, is also illustrated. Woodcut from the title-page of Eucharius RSsslin, Kreuterbuch (Frankfurt, 1536).

to find the ‘natural order’ existing among plants: the natural relationships, the families in which God had created them.
This activity in growing new plants in the garden was reflected in print, and a number of large illustrated books on plants were published during the sixteenth century and found a ready market: such as Otto Brunfels’ Herbarum vivae icones (‘Living Pictures of Plants’) (1530); Leonhard Fuchs’ De historia stirpium (‘On the His-tory of Plants’) (1542); Pietro Andrea Mattioli’s Commentarii on Dioscorides (1554); and Rembert Dodoens’ Cruydeboek (‘Herbal’) of 1563, which was pillaged by John Gerard for his Herball, or Generali Histone of Plantes (1597) (Figure 3.7). The book acted as a garden: around 1649 a Cambridge medical student was advised to read John Parkinson on plants (either his Paradisi in sole paradisus terrestris. Or, a Garden of All Sorts of Pleasant Flowers which our English Ayre will permitt to be noursed up (1629), or his Theatrum Botanicum: The Theater of Plantes (1640)), for Parkinson
does not only outvie Gerard in the number, but also in the method of his plan, sorting and bedding them so neatly together in divers knots and tribes, that you enter into him, as in to a fair well ordered garden, where you may readily pick out which herb you will.10


The culture of gardens 51




Figure 3.7 Part of the title-page of Gerard’s Herbati,.

The book is a garden: the garden is equally a book in which God’s planning of the natural world can be uncovered. Indeed, as the botanists came up with ever new versions of the ‘natural order’, so the gardeners would have to dig the plants up and rearrange them in the beds. Once again the gardeners turned to Latin, not this time to read the Ancients on gardens, but to name coherently and systematically, in a common and neutral language, the


52 Andrew Cunningham


residents of the garden, the plants; thereby they created botanical Latin, a language the ancient Romans had never known.
The range and variety of plants increased dramatically through the use of the physic gardens, and catalogues were sometimes pub-lished which reveal the extent of the living collections at certain dates. From the catalogue of the Padua Garden, we know that in 1644 it had
11 varieties of anemone, 10 of geranium, 13 different irises, no less than 15 varieties of malva (mallow), three of the ‘marvel of Peru’ ... 13 different narcissi, nine orchids, three water lilies, five peonies, eight poppies, perhaps as many as 20 varieties of the ranunculus or buttercup family, and 11 roses."
Some people came to see the beauty of the garden as depending largely on the variety and colour of flowering plants,12 especially those introduced from abroad - ‘outlandish’ plants, as John Park-inson called them. Flowers were all the fashion in many private gardens of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries all over Europe, as is evident from Sir Thomas Hanmer, writing around 1659 in England:
As soon as peace hath introduced plenty and wealth into a country men quickly apply themselves to pleasures, and by degrees endeavour to improve them to the height. Amongst the innocent ones, persons of quality and ingenuity have in all ages delighted themselves with beautiful gardens, whose chiefest ornaments are choice flowers, trees and plants; after which rarities the French and Dutch have for some years been most diligent enquirers and collectors, as the Italians and Germans before them, and since our late war many of this nation. The rich among us now are not satisfied with good houses and parks, or handsome avenues and issues to and from their dwellings, their ambition and curiosity extends also to very costly embellishments of their gardens, orchards and walks, and some spare no charge, amongst other things, in procuring the rarest flowers and plants to set them forth withal.13
The flower which attracted most passionate attention was the tulip, introduced from Turkey in the mid-sixteenth century; there was an extraordinary episode of ‘tulipomania’ in Holland from 1643 to 1647 when, after a frenzy of betting on the colours and patterns of flowers that would grow from newly bred bulbs, there was then a ‘bubble’ of financial speculation in bulbs, and when this burst many people were left heavily in debt.14
The plantfulness of gardens was not to last: both the French formal garden and, later, the ‘landscape garden’, made flowers and plant variety less important than the grand vista. The passion for planting flowers in gardens does not seem to have returned until the nineteenth century.


The culture of gardens 53


Cultivating one’s garden
Finally we turn to two other senses of ‘the culture of gardens’: garden culture, and garden cultivation. That is to say, on the one hand the role of gardens as places to practise social cultivation, and on the other the practical cultivation or horticulture needed to keep the vistas visible and to make the plants and trees grow where art required them.
We often know, or can discover, what garden owners and plan-ners were trying to achieve with their gardens, in terms of effect. But of their actual use we know almost nothing systematically. Yet it is clear that the garden was a most important social location at certain periods for both private and public purposes: for meetings, plays and picnics, for discussing philosophy, war, peace and love, for trysts and quarrels, and, best of all, for firework displays. The gardens of sixteenth-century Rome, for instance, were used for many kinds of entertaining: jousting, banquets, pageants, mas-ques, philosophical discourses, poetry recitals, plays and con-certs.15 The gardens of England in the late sixteenth century were where lovers met secretly, to the disapproval of more puritan observers:
In the fields and suburbs of the cities they have gardens, either paled or walled round about very high, with their arbours and bowers fit for the purpose . . . And for that their gardens are locked, some of them have three or four keys a-piece, whereof one they keep for themselves, the other their paramours have to go in before them, lest haply they should be perceived, for then were all their sport dashed . . . These gardens are excellent places, and for the purpose; for if they can speak with their darlings nowhere else, yet there they may be sure to meet them and to receive the guerdon [reward] of their pains: they know best what I mean.16
When social events happen in a garden, the garden gives them added meaning, or different meaning, and makes possible types of social negotiation and relation not possible within the different, and more stationary, geography of a house or hall. A walk in a garden can lead to contrived encounters. One can hide in the garden or meet secretly in the dark between the hedges; one can whisper without being overheard. And gardens are, after all, delib-erately constructed to create mood: this mood colours and shapes what does and what can go on between people in a garden. A social history of garden use, if we had one, would be very revealing of attitudes and behaviour at different times.
And last of all there is the history of the culture or practical cultivation of gardens, the history of horti-culture, of the ‘low cul-ture’ of how gardens were actually cultivated, and by whom, the


.54 Andrew Cunningham




Figure 3.8 ‘Spring’: a Dutch garden scene of 1570; engraving of a picture by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. The spring garden tasks are being carried out to the instructions of the mistress of the house by garden labourers of both sexes, who are mostly portrayed as faceless.

history of husbandmen or practical gardeners and their knowledge and skills. Here the historians have not been so busy as they have been in investigating the world of garden owners. We lack a his-tory of gardening: a history of skills in the garden, of tacit knowl-edge, a history of how it was made possible to grow all the wrong things in all the wrong places all of the time, a history of all the practical knowledge without which none of the plans for gardens could have been carried into effect. Although some cardinals and princes believed that it was good spiritual exercise to put their own hand to the planting,17 and there were passionate gentlemen gar-deners at times, as for instance in mid-seventeenth-century Eng-land and the Netherlands, yet the back-breaking, routine work of gardening in all weathers fell not to the owners of grand gardens


The culture of gardens 55


but to their servants.18 The people with these skills were, for the most part, people who did not write their knowledge down, or did not know how to write at all. Even a garden technician who rose to the highest level of theory in garden planning such as André Le N.tre (1613-1700), ‘Gardener of Kings, and King of Gar-deners’, who designed and supervised the construction of the Ver-sailles gardens for Louis XIV of France, and who is universally recognized as a genius at garden design, did not write anything down about his craft. However, Le N.tre was very aware of the importance of his (practical) gardening skills to his achievement in the high theory of making gardens. In a famous moment, when the king ennobled him, Le N.tre chose for his coat of arms three snails and a cabbage, and when Louis XIV expressed astonish- ,-ment, Le N.tre said, ‘Sire, would you have me forget my spade? Think what I owe it!’
It is certainly the case that some history of practical gardening could be written, paralleling the history of theoretical gardening that we already have. A few practitioners did write down some-thing of the skill and craft of gardening, and those writing in English included Thomas Hill, with his gardening books of the 1560s and 1570s, such as The Gardener’s Labyrinth, and Phillip Miller, ‘Gardener to the Botanic garden at Chelsea’, with his very popular Gardener’s Dictionary, published from the 1720s. From such works we can get a glimpse of the endless clipping, manuring, planting, propagating, replanting and weeding that a formal garden required, of the advance planning to make the garden immaculate and perfect for whenever its master should visit it, and of the trades which grew up to supply the demand for seeds and plants.19 Practical gardeners of the past are indeed visible if not yet audible, for they can be seen getting on with the job in countless drawings and paintings of royal and noble gardens - though, as they were ‘only’ servants engaged in a mechanic art, they are usually por-trayed as faceless men and women: anonymously. But there could be joy and spirituality in such work for the labourers, as well as sweat. Thomas Hill, a lover not just of gardens but of plants and practical gardening, wrote in 1577:
The life of man in this world is but thraldom, when the Sences are not pleased and what rarer object can there be on earth . . . than a beautifull and Odoriferous Garden plot Artificially composed, where he may read and contemplate on the wonderfull works of the great Creator, in Plants and Flowers; for if he observeth with a judicial eye, and serious judge-ment their variety of Colours, Sents, Beauty, Shapes, Interlacing, Enamil- ling, Mixture, Turnings, Windings, Embossments, Operations and Verr-ues, it is most admirable to behold, and meditate upon the same.20


56 Andrew Cunningham
i

Further reading
Clifford, Derek, A History of Garden Design (London, 1962).
Comito, Terry, The Idea of the Garden in the Renaissance (New Brunswick, NJ, 1978).
Goody, Jack, The Culture of Flowers (Cambridge, 1993).
Harvey, John, Medieval Gardens (London, 1981).
Hill, Thomas, The Gardener’s Labyrinth (orig. 1577), ed. with an introduc-tion by Richard Mabey (Oxford, 1987).
Hobhouse, Penelope, Plants in Garden History (London, 1992).
Lazzaro, Claudia, The Italian Renaissance Garden (Yale, 1990).
Moynihan, Elizabeth B., Paradise as a Garden in Persia and Mughal India
(London, 1980).
Prest, John, The Garden of Ijden: The Botanic Garden and the Re-Creation of Paradise (Yale, 1981).
Reeds, Karen, Botany in Medieval and Renaissance Universities (New York, 1991).
Woodbridge, Kenneth, Princely Gardens: The Origin and Development of the French Formal Style (New York, 1986).


PAULA FINDLEN

4 Courting nature

Between the mid-fifteenth and the mid-seventeenth centuries the study of nature enjoyed a remarkable resurgence within Western Europe. Natural history as a form of writing had been codified by the ancients in the, Greek philosopher Aristotle’s (384-322 BC) works on animals, his disciple Theophrastus’ (c. 371-286 BC) works on plants and stones, the physician Dioscorides’s (c. 40-80 AD) Materia medica, and the Roman encyclopaedist Pliny’s (22/23- 78 AD) Historia naturalise but natural history as a discipline was an early modern invention.1 Before the sixteenth century no uni-versity in Europe had hired professors to teach natural history or funded botanical gardens. While late medieval princes, such as the Emperor Frederick II in mid-thirteenth-century Sicily and the Duke of Burgundy, Jean de Berry (1340-1416), included natural objects among their coveted possessions, none of them considered natural history an important enough subject to devote vast quantit-ies of resources to it. Few patricians boasted museums of natural history in their homes or private botanical gardens on their estates, as they were to do with increasing regularity in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. By the 1470s the first printed Latin trans-lations and re-editions of the works of Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Pliny had appeared but only a handful of scholars engaged directly with the content, let alone attempted to write their own natural histories. With the exception of Frederick II, few princes made scientific activities a courtly pursuit; with the exception of Albertus Magnus (c. 1200-80), almost no natural philosophers considered natural history a subject worthy of their attention. Natural history languished just as Pliny had left it: unwieldy, encyclopaedic, prone to anecdote, and highly unfashionable. As the Bolognese naturalist Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522-1605) remarked in 1585, it was a ‘faculty buried for so many hundreds of years in the gloom of ignorance and silence’.2
Despite the great vogue for bestiaries, herbals, and lapidaries, the naturalistic poetry of the twelfth-century writer Alain of Lille, and the detailed commentaries of Albertus Magnus on Aristotle’s scientific writings, the scholastic and courtly worlds of the later Middle Ages exhibited very little interest in the comprehensive

57



58 Paula Findlen


description of nature that we most commonly associate with the discipline of natural history.3 Instead, nature was primarily a sub-ject for allegory and commentary or for medicine. Equally import-ant, there was a vast difference in the way in which inhabitants of these diverse environments - the cathedral schools, the univer-sities, and the courts - perceived nature. Each developed a particu-lar form of discourse suited to its immediate context. In contrast, the study of nature during the early modern period linked the learning of the schools to the culture of the humanist academies and the display of the courts. Central to the erosion of these bar-riers was the new image of the naturalist, who was increasingly perceived as someone who could move readily between these dif-ferent worlds.
The revival of natural history was due as muck to the new social circumstances of the naturalist as to the reverence for ancient learn-ing and the voyages of exploration and discovery. By the mid-fifteenth century humanists with an interest in natural history could be found at leading Renaissance courts. Nicol. Leoniceno (1428-1524), the physician who initiated the first full-scale critique of Pliny with his De Plinii. . . erroribus (‘On the Errors of Pliny’) (1492), served Borso d’Este in Ferrara and was a guest of Lorenzo de’ Medici when he travelled to Florence in 1490. Respondents to his attack on Pliny, such as the lawyer and Gonzaga courtier Pandolfo Collenuccio and the Venetian patrician, Ermolao Barbaro (1444-93), were also members of the humanist elite who valued the learning of the Greco-Roman world as worthy of recuperation and imitation.4 Thus it was in the society of educated professionals, patricians who viewed learning as an appropriate leisure activity, and rulers who financed the activities of scholars that an intense interest in the accurate depiction and description of the natural world first arose.

The naturalist and the prince
The academic community that revived natural history self-consciously presented it as a form of enquiry designed to appeal broadly to different sectors of society, most particularly the urban patriciate and nobility. In his 1543 lecture inaugurating his position as the first professor of natural history at the University of Ferrara, Giuseppe Gabrieli (1494-1553) aptly summarized the new social parameters of his discipline. Natural history, he proclaimed, was appropriate ‘not only for humble and lowly men, but people coming from every social class conspicuous for political power, wealth, nobility and knowledge such as kings, emperors, princes, heroes, poets, philosophers, and similar men’. Reflecting on the uneasy status of his chosen field of study, Gabrieli lamented the


Courting nature 59


‘unhappy decadence of our times’ that led princes to neglect to support naturalists and led physicians to shun the study of nature as an ignoble art. He responded to this problem by ennobling natu-ral history, thereby making it worthy of his audience. Contrasting the study of nature with other sciences, he exclaimed, ‘This is the only science of divine origins, the only one given to men by the Gods’. Exhorting his fellow Ferraresi to emulate the munificence of their rulers, Gabrieli lavished praise upon the d’Este princes whose patronage of men such as Leoniceno had allowed natural history to ‘raise its head from the most profound darkness’. Such praise was pointedly directed at Ercole II who was undoubtedly in the audience, along with most of the courtiers in Ferrara, to hear the city’s first official lesson on nature.
; The rulers of Ferrara were among the’first princes who brought ‘men of great and diligent erudition [to their court] and supported them at great expense ... in order to revive this knowledge of plants’.5 Like many early modern rulers, they increasingly came- to see natural history as a noble, pleasurable, and useful subject, worthy in every respect of their patronage. Similarly, the phys-icians who so disparaged the empirical study of nature were soon persuaded that natural history had a legitimate place in the medical curriculum, in part because their employers seemed so willing to finance professorships and research facilities (museums, anatomy theatres, and botanical gardens) in this field and eagerly hired physicians with an expertise in natural history to fill the most important positions in the cities and at the courts. In the half- century preceding Gabrieli’s inaugural lecture, humanist princes and their scholars throughout Europe gradually integrated natural history into court culture. During the middle decades of the fif-teenth century, such popes as Nicholas V and Sixtus IV financed lavish editions of Aristotle and Theophrastus, meticulously pre-pared by Theodore Gaza (c. 1400-75). The Medici Pope Leo X further placed the papal imprimatur upon natural history when he appointed Giuliano da Foligno to the first professorship in natural history in 1513 and, shortly afterward, displayed a stuffed rhino-ceros in the papal palace.
By the time Gabrieli composed his oration, princes competed openly among each other to establish the most extensive research programme in this area, particularly in Italy where courts abounded and where natural history first experienced its intellec-tual revival. The very year that Ercole II d’Este appointed Gabrieli to the chair in ‘medicinal simples’, as natural history was often called, Cosimo I de’ Medici, the first Grand Duke of Tuscany, wooed the eminent naturalist Luca Ghini (c. 1490-1556) away from Bologna to accept the first chair at the University of Pisa and manage its new botanical garden. In a relatively short period of


60 Paula Findlen


time, humanists who initially considered an interest in nature to be marginal to their scholarly pursuits found themselves studying nature full time, largely because that study was supported by patronage that began in the courts, and moved outward to include the universities and the cities.
As a scientific discipline, natural history had certain distinct advantages that facilitated its introduction to the Renaissance courts. The popularity of bestiaries and lapidaries among the late medieval nobility provided an important precedent for the intro-duction of natural histories, particularly ones filled with elaborate allegorical imagery like the work of Aldrovandi and Joachim Cam- erarius the Younger (1534-98) that defined the ‘emblematic world view’.6 Furthermore, Aristotle’s success in gaining the patronage of Alexander the Great and Pliny’s attentiveness to the tastes of * the Roman patriciate made them reasonable prototypes for the naturalist as courtier. Aldrovandi alluded to this explicitly when he chose to portray himself giving his Omithologia (1599) to Pope Clement VIII, surrounded by images of Aristotle and Pliny offer-ing up their works to Alexander the Great and the Emperor Vespasian (Figure 4.1). Natural objects as well as books about nature became popular at court. Menageries, gardens, and museums all appealed to an audience that cultivated the exotic and the beautiful and thrived upon display. Rulers from the Medici to Louis XIV, regardless of their interest in natural history as a disci-pline, loved the aesthetics of nature. The French surgeon Ambroise Pare’s (1510-90) characterization of Charles IX as some-one who delighted in ‘large, weighty, and monstrous things’ applied to most early modern monarchs. We have only to recall the rhinoceros that Leo X brought to Rome or the elephant that Louis XIV commanded his academicians to dissect in 1683 to real-ize how apt this description is.7
Unlike the traditional components of natural philosophy, natural history was tactile and visual, and required no specialized knowl-edge in order to participate. The professional naturalists who regu-larly botanized throughout the world were accompanied not only by assistants who collected and recorded what they observed but also by wealthy patricians who could imagine no greater pleasure than an excursion into the countryside.8 The ability of naturalists to arrange objects in pleasing ways in their museums and the skill with which artists captured nature’s contours on canvas served to heighten the aesthetic pleasure of viewing nature. Court artists such as Jacopo Ligozzi in Florence, Teodoro Ghisi in Mantua, and Giuseppe Arcimboldo in Prague made naturalistic illustrations their speciality. The Medici grand dukes were so enamoured of Ligozzi’s skill in this area that they willingly lent him out to


Courting nature 61




Aldrovandi to expand his choice of subjects through access to the Bolognese professor’s museum.
Given the incorporation of artistic and literary skills into natural history, it is not surprising that the courts most known for their cultivation of learning and art provided crucial support for the revi-talization of natural history. In Florence, the Grand Dukes Francesco I and Ferdinando I, sons of the Cosimo I who had estab-lished natural history in Pisa, expanded Medici support. Francesco I invited Aldrovandi to view his private collections and encouraged the Natural History that Aldrovandi claimed would rival Aristotle’s and Pliny’s; Ferdinando I established a natural history museum in the Pisan botanical garden in the 1590s and sent his court botanist to Crete to explore the flora and fauna there. The Medici grand dukes continued to be so diligent in sponsoring natural history that in 1697 the court botanist Paolo Boccone (1633-1704) remarked that all the courtiers in Florence studied nature ‘in imitation of their ruler’.9
Besides Florence, Rome, Prague, and Vienna were the principal courts in which natural history flourished. Within the papal state, the Sack of Rome in 1527 precipitated a temporary demise in such

Figure 4.1 Ulisse Aldrovandi giving his Omithologia (1599) to Clement VIII. From Ulisse Aldrovandi, Omithologia (Bologna, 1599).


62 Paula Findlen


Figure 4.2 A botanical expedition in the sixteenth century as depicted by Gherardo Cibo (1512-1600).



activities, though the annexation of Bologna allowed the popes indirectly to take credit for the thriving community of naturalists clustered around that city’s university. Encouraging the support of natural history at the University of Bologna to rival the activities in Pisa and Padua, the early modern popes reminded the upstart Medici and the ‘godless’ Venetians that they were the supreme patrons of learning in Europe. By the mid-sixteenth century calmer political waters afforded the papacy the opportunity to make Rome a centre for natural history again. Within a few decades, some of


Courting nature 63




the best naturalists in Italy came to Rome as papal physicians. During his tenure as papal physician in the 1550s, Ippolito Salviani (1514-72) published his remarkable Aquatilium animalium historia (‘History of Aquatic Animals’) (1554-8), dedicated to Pope Paul IV and with introductions by Pope Julius III, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, the King of France Henri II, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany Cosimo I. In the 1560s Michele Mercad (1541— 93) was invited to supervise the botanical garden and create a min- eralogical museum, known as the Metallotheca, that opened up into the famous Belvedere courtyard of the Vatican (Figure 4.3). Natu-ralists such as Aldrovandi visited this museum and no less a figure than Mercati’s mentor Andrea Cesalpino (1519-1603), known for his precise classification of plants and a description of the circulation of the blood that prefigured William Harvey’s, was wooed away from the Medici stronghold in Pisa to join the com-munity in Rome.
In Prague and Vienna a succession of Habsburg emperors searched the length and breadth of the Holy Roman Empire to bring Europe’s best naturalists to the court. In quick succession,

Figure 4.3 Michele Mercati’s mineralogical museum in the Vatican, off the Belvedere courtyard. From Michele Mercati, Metallotheca (Rome, 1717).


64 Paula Findlen


Pietro Andrea Mattioli (1500-77), author of a famous translation of and commentary on Dioscorides’ Materia medica, and the Flemish naturalists Rembert Dodoens (1517-85) and Carolus Clusius (1526-1609), both known for their accurate work in plant classifi-cation, arrived. Mattioli’s rise to fame illustrates well how the munificence of princes facilitated the study of nature. Shortly after the publication of his Italian translation of Dioscorides in 1544, which he dedicated to the Archduke Ferdinand, Mattioli confessed to Aldrovandi, ‘I am hoping for some notable reward’. Within a year, he was appointed imperial physician, a position he enjoyed under Ferdinand and his successor, Maximilian II. In Italy Matti-oli had been one of many town physicians; in Prague and later Innsbruck he had artists, engravers, printers, and translators at his disposal. During the 1560s his ‘Dioscorides’, as contemporaries called it, grew from a local project into a work of international renown. Under imperial patronage, Latin, German, and Czech translations appeared, and illustrations were made to accompany the text. By 1565 it had become a lavish work of some 1,500 pages.10 Rarely had a career depended so much on one book. Mattioli became the envy of other naturalists such as Aldrovandi and Giovan Battista della Porta (1535-1615), both of whom tried unsuccessfully to interest the Habsburgs in supporting their natu-ral histories.
As the above examples suggest, naturalists had much to gain by arriving at court, though certainly this was not the only environ-ment in which to study nature. An appointment as court physician, imperial ‘herbalist and plant collector’ in the case of Clusius, royal surgeon in the case of Paré, or royal cosmographer and ‘overseer of the Royal Collection of Curiosities at Fontainebleau’ in the case of André Thevet (1504-92), allowed a naturalist unique access to resources vital to the global rewriting of natural history then underway.” Enhanced status and greater visibility made other naturalists more likely to share information and specimens with someone under princely sponsorship, thereby increasing a natural-ist’s authority as a commentator on nature. When Mattioli moved to the imperiál court, he expanded his knowledge of nature from north-central Italy, the region where he had lived and worked, to the entire breadth of the Holy Roman Empire. Similarly, the Span-ish physician Francisco Hernández (1517-87) extended his reach from Spain to the farthest reaches of the Spanish empire - the Indies - in his capacity as court physician, while naturalists under papal sponsorship commanded the resources of the Catholic missionaries scattered throughout the world. By making natural history a ‘princely thing’, a phrase Ferdinando I de’ Medici used to persuade his brother Francesco I to fund Aldrovandi’s Omiiholo- gia, the first generation of naturalists ensured themselves some


Courting nature 65


measure of prestige and financial support, and used their access to the courts to collect the materials necessary to examine nature.12
The naturalist and the city
While a select group of naturalists made their careers at court, the majority of their colleagues worked within a predominantly urban setting. Despite the financial support Aldrovandi received from many Italian princes, he remained in Bologna, employed by the city as a university professor, curator of the botanical gardens (f. 1568) and protomedico (a post from which he supervised the natural ingredients placed in medicines). Many of his contempor-aries - most famously Conrad Gesner (1516—65) in Zurich and Leonhart Rauwolf (1535-96) in Augsburg - were employed as town physicians; other, like Francesco Calzolari (1521-1600) in Verona, famous for his botanical excursions to Monte Baldo, and Ferrante Imperato (1535-1601) in Naples, well known for his care-ful work on fossils in his Deirhistoria naturale (1599), made a living as apothecaries. Even naturalists who arrived at court did not always stay. Both Dodoens and Clusius, luminaries of the Habs-burg court in the 1570s and 1580s, chose to return to the Nether-lands when the University of Leiden offered them positions.13
Natural history quickly became popular with the urban patriciate in the sixteenth century. It fitted well within the market-place culture of the city, where goods were bartered and sold. In numerous cities, clerics, lawyers, physicians, and other notables cultivated gardens and museums and participated in the endless cycle of visits, exchanges, and demonstrations that defined the world of collecting. By the time the Swiss physician Thomas Platter visited the home of Sir Walter Cope in London in 1599 to see the rooms ‘stuffed with queer foreign objects’, museums of natural history abounded on the continent, among them his brother Felix’s collection in Basle.14 The most famous Renaissance ‘theatres of nature’ belonged to such professional naturalists as Calzolari, Imperato, Mercati, and Aldrovandi (who with evident pride described his museum in Bologna as the eighth wonder of the world). By the seventeenth century the ownership of such col-lections had become more diffuse, as natural history increasingly became integrated into the leisure activities of the urban elite. Sig-nificantly, only four of the twenty-six letters comprising Paolo Boccone’s Osservazioni naturali (1684) were addressed to men with a professional interest in nature; the remainder were directed to leading citizens of various cities. The great collections of this epoch were maintained by clerics such as the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1602-80), founder of the Roman College museum, and Manfredo Settala (1600-80) in Milan; by lawyers such as Nicolas-Claude


>

6& Paula Findlen


Fabri de Peiresc (1580-1637) in Aix; and by the members of fledg-ling scientific societies like the Academy of the Lynx-Eyed in Rome, the Royal Society in London, and the Paris Academy of Sciences.
Unlike John Tradescant the Elder (1570/75-1638), who collected nature as part of his professional duties as gardener first to Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, and then to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, the gentlemen naturalists of this later era defined themselves as virtuosi, men of leisure whose curiosity knew no bounds. These were the men who rushed to buy tulips, puzzled over fossils and luminescent stones, and exclaimed over the Danish anatomist Nicolaus Steno’s (1638-1686) skilful dissections in Leiden, Paris, and Florence. ‘This Monsieur Steno is the rage here’, wrote one provincial physician during a trip to Paris in 1665. ‘Neither a butterfly nor a fly escapes his skill. He would count the bones in a flea - if fleas have bones.’ Only a few months later, the same person attempted to replicate ‘the style of Monsieur Steno’ in the French town of Caen for the local noblemen and noble-women, eager to see nature’s latest curiosity.15 So quickly did the urban elites in various cities inform each other of Steno’s skill, that long before he arrived in Florence in 1666 the Medici court natu-ralist Francesco Redi (1626-97) was already anticipating the pleas-ures of dissecting animals from the grand-ducal menagerie with him.
Studying nature appealed to urban elites as well as courtiers pri-marily because it made nature a part of a nascent consumer cul-ture. For patricians who collected art, furniture, and books, the possession of natural objects was yet another means of displaying one’s accumulated wealth. When Elizabeth I’s surgeon, George Baker, visited John Gerard’s (1545-1612) garden in Holborn he wondered ‘how one of his degree . . . could ever accomplish the same.’16 The more exotic the objects in a museum, the more the owner could boast about the dangerous voyages undertaken, the contacts in every corner of the world, and the care employed to achieve the desired result. No expense was spared in the re-creation of nature in microcosm.
Patricians particularly delighted in novelties. New objects and new experiences, all of which collecting offered in plentiful supply, featured prominently in their leisure activities. While professional naturalists benefited from expanded lay interest in nature, they occasionally lamented the faddishness of it all. In 1594, for example, Aldrovandi recalled with nostalgia the excitement that his planting of a ‘Peruvian chrysanthemum’, the first sunflower seen in Italy, had occasioned in Bologna (Figure 4.4). ‘It was visited by all the gentlemen and gentlewomen for the size and beauty of its flower. But now it is so vulgar that no one cares about it.’ In


Courting nature 67




Figure 4.4 Ulisse Aldrovandi’s ‘Peruvian chrysanthemum’ (sunflower). From Biblioteca Universitaria, Bologna, Aldrovandi. Tavole di piante, vol. I, p. 75.

similar fashion, Gerard noted in his famous Her ball, or Generali Historie of Plantes (1597) that goldenrod no longer elicited sighs of appreciation from the English nobility since it had become common.17 Professional naturalists continued to find even the most ordinary aspects of nature important to their work, but they cat-ered to an audience who subsumed nature within the category of wonder.
The activities surrounding the study of nature further integrated it into the social world of the urban elites. Since individual natural-ists rarely had the resources to create more than modest museums, the most successful collectors depended upon gifts to make their encyclopaedias of nature complete. Echoing the list of potential connoisseurs of natural history that Gabrieli articulated in his 1543 oration, Aldrovandi thanked the ‘famous Cardinals, Bishops,


68 Paula Findlen


Archbishops, Dukes, Barons, Counts, Doctors, and Scholars’ who had contributed the objects which he classified in his unpublished Methodus fossilium (‘Method of Fossils’). Similarly, the apothecary Imperato felt that he could not have completed his natural history without the help of ‘most of the virtuosi in Europe.’18 While popes and princes offered up lavish gifts worthy of their status as patrons - in 1635 Tradescant acquired mementoes of Henry VII and Henry VIII from the reigning Charles I - naturalists, travel-lers, and the simply curious provided the ordinary stuff that formed the core of such collections.
As patricians travelled with greater frequency, both within Europe and beyond, museums became a privileged site of socia-bility. In these settings urban elites met and conversed upon a wide variety of topics, exchanging news as they would later do in Theophraste Renaudot’s weekly meetings at the Bureau d’Adresse in early seventeenth-century Paris or in the eighteenth-century coffee-houses. Subscribing to Pliny’s encyclopaedic definition of natural history as everything in the world worthy of memory, col-lectors made the museum an ideal setting in which to converse.19 The infinite number of curious objects displayed guaranteed an endless array of topics. Aldrovandi’s and Gesner’s lengthy Latin tomes memorialized the culture of erudition, but more popular vol-umes such as Francesco Imperato’s Discorsi intomo a diverse cose naturali (‘Discourses on Diverse Natural Things’) (1628) or Redi’s Esperienze intomo alia generazione degl’insetti (‘Experiments on the Generation of Insects’) (1668) captured the essence of these dia-logues about nature. While the virtuosi of Naples enthused about pygmies, crocodiles, mandrake roots, tarantula, fossils, and other natural marvels (Figure 4.5), their counterparts in Florence enjoyed Redi’s nauseating experiments with vipers, scorpions, and the rotting carcasses which proved that spontaneous generation existed only in the mind of Aristotle and not in nature. The point of it all was not solely (or even primarily) to determine any truth about nature, but to fuel the conversations of the virtuosi who con-tinued to exclaim over these things.
By the late sixteenth century few members of the urban elite had neglected to enter a museum. Naturalists such as Gesner and Aldrovandi, ever mindful of the legacy they would leave to posterity, kept records of their visitors. Gesner’s Liber amicorum (‘Book of Friends’) recorded the names of 227 scholars who had visited him between 1555 and 1565. Aldrovandi collected the names of all the visitors whom he felt shed honour upon his enterprise in two books: the Liber in quo viri nobilitate honore et virtute insignes, viso musaeo . . . propria nomina ad perpetuam rei memoriam scribunt (‘Book in Which Men of Extraordinary Nobility, Honour and Virtue Who have Seen the Museum . . . Write Their


Courting nature 69




Own Name’) and Catalogus virorum, qui visitarunt Musaeum nostrum (‘Catalogue of Men Who Have Visited Our Museum’). While the former contained only the names of the most illustrious visitors, including the 1635 entry of one Cardinal Ubaldo, the papal legate who described the museum as the work of ‘another Noah’ (Figure 4.6), the latter arranged entries for 1,579 people ‘according to the order of dignity, study and profession’ and by city or region. Many of Aldrovandi’s visitors came from the courts - for example, the Duke of Mantua, Rudolf Il’s councillor and the ‘Carver for the King of Poland’. Others were fellow naturalists and collectors such as Camerarius and the young Caspar Bauhin (1560-1624), whose Pinax theatri botanici (‘Index to the Theatre of Botany’) (1623) was one of the most important contributions to taxonomy in the seven-teenth century. However, the vast majority of visitors were patricians who viewed nature as a continuous spectacle placed in front of them by the humanists who revived the empirical study of nature.20
Naturalists collected nature to increase their store of observations

Figure 4.5 The museum of Ferrante Imperato in Naples 1599. From Ferrante Imperato, Dell’hisioria naturale (Venice, 1672 edn.)


70 Paula Findlen




Figure 4.6 Page from Ulisse Aldrovandi’s ‘Book in Which Men of Extraordinary Nobility, Honor and Virtue Who Have Seen the Museum . . . Write Their Own Name’.



and refine their statements about the essential structures that com-posed the natural world, but they also derived great prestige from these activities.21 The increased mobility of the upper classes privi-leged travel and collecting as activities that linked the European cities. By the middle of the seventeenth century Kircher rightfully claimed that no trip to Rome was complete without a tour of the Roman College museum. Few people went to London without seeing Tradescant’s ‘ark’ in Lambeth or the Royal Society’s ‘repository’. Collecting allowed naturalists to expand their range of acquaintances, coming into contact with virtually every sector of society, from the lowly fishermen who sold them oddities in the market-place to the princes who paid handsomely to see such things. The naturalists who had begun their careers with the schol-


Courting nature 71


i


arly task of correcting the errors of Pliny or completing the work of Aristotle, soon found, themselves in possession of the world.
The naturalist and the world
Natural history intrigued princes and merchants because it was a tangible sign of their ability to roam the globe. Whether a natural-ist travelled like Rauwolf, who spent 1573-6 in the Far East, or stayed at home like Aldrovandi, his success depended upon his ability to incorporate the novelties of the New World, Africa, and Asia into his findings. The new interest in material culture engen-dered by the voyages of exploration contributed greatly to the development of natural history. In cities such as Seville, London, and Amsterdam naturalists enjoyed the support of patrons who saw a certain profit in collecting data from the Americas. Between 1550 and 1650 entrepreneurs in these different centres launched three of the greatest projects of that period: the natural histories of Mexico, Virginia, and Brazil.
Philip II had already exhibited a personal interest in medicinal simples by the time he commissioned Hernández to spend six years in Mexico gathering its flora and fauna. He had sponsored a botan-ical garden as part of the royal pharmacy at the Escorial, purchased the collections of a Seville physician and a royal apothecary in Madrid, appointed Honorato Pomar (professor of medicine at the University of Valencia) as court naturalist, and sponsored a 1555 Spanish translation of Dioscorides. In 1570 he appointed Hernán-dez, already a court physician, 'protomèdico general of our Indies, isles and tierra firmed requesting that he depart for New Spain immediately. Between 1571 and 1577 Hernández and the artists and assistants who accompanied him collected thousands of plants, animals, and minerals, and interviewed numerous natives about their medicinal uses. By the time Hernández returned to. Spain, he had sixteen precious volumes of notes, specimens, and illus-trations.22 Despite his efforts the majority of his work never appeared in print. Philip II decided to publish a more modest natural history of Mexico, leaving the majority of Hernández’s work in storage in the Escorial where it was lost during a fire in 1671. After Hernández’s death in 1587, the king entrusted a Nea-politan physician with the project. It languished in Naples for sev-eral decades until members of the Accademia dei Lincei (‘Academy of the Lynxes’) brought it to Rome. In 1648 the definitive edition of the Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus (‘Treasury of Medicinal Things from New Spain’) appeared, dedicated to Philip IV. But by then the Spanish were no longer the powerful rulers they had once been and no one in the Escorial seemed to really care.


72 Paula Findlen


In 1585 Sir Walter Raleigh launched a second expedition to Vir-ginia, with the blessing of Elizabeth I. On this trip he. took three scientifically skilled men with him: the astronomer Thomas Har-riot, the metallurgist Joachim Ganz, and the artist John White (c. 1540/50-1606). One of Harriot’s and White’s principal tasks was the collection and illustration of North American specimens to publicize the English colony at home. When White returned to England in 1587 he discussed his botanical findings with John Gerard, who published some of them in his Herball, and shared a few insect drawings with Thomas Penny (d. 1589) who included them in his Theater of Insects, published by Thomas Moffet in 1634. Other illustrations found their way into Walter Bigges’s Expedition of Francis Drake (1588), Harriot’s A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia (1590), and Edward Top- sell’s Historic of Four-Footed Beastes (1607).23 The promised natural history of Virginia, however, never appeared: White was increas-ingly busy in his role as governor of Raleigh, Virginia; Harriot had returned to England; Raleigh’s financial situation was always shaky; and the Queen continued to be ambivalent about her colony. The enthusiasm with which patrons initiated these col-lecting projects did not always last. By the seventeenth century only the objects displayed in Tradescant’s museum gave testimony to the Virginia project. The British empire had been established but its natural history had yet to be written.
The same year in which Hernandez’s natural history of Mexico appeared, Georg Markgraf’s (1610-43) Historia naturalis Brasiliae (‘Natural History of Brazil’) (1648) appeared. Markgraf had been employed by Prince Johan Maurits of Nassau to gather information on this region during Maurits’s tenure as Governor-General of Brazil for the Dutch West India Company. In Brazil Johan Maurits had established a zoo, botanical garden, and museum, and employed several artists to produce over one thousand illustrations for the natural history. In many respects, the Natural History of Brazil was a more successful project than those of Mexico and Vir-ginia, simply because the success of its patron depended upon its completion. Unlike Philip II and Elizabeth I, Johan Maurits was a minor prince with little land and no power to his name. Seven years in Brazil provided him with a unique opportunity to collect and create artefacts to amuse the princes of Europe. When he returned to the Netherlands he spent the next few decades distri-buting lavish gifts - ‘documents, paintings and parrots’, as one contemporary reported - to the kings of France and Denmark, the anatomical theatre in Leiden, and the Elector of Brandenburg who awarded him with the title of imperial prince in return. Similarly, the Natural History of Brazil became a gift that he could distribute to gain further favours.24


Courting nature 73


Natural history fitted well within the images of empire promoted by early modern rulers and the majority of naturalists benefited from these ambitions, directly or indirectly. As the above examples suggest, however, it was much easier to accumulate objects for the new history of nature than to see their description into print. When Gesner died only his histories of animals had been printed; Aldro- vandi published four works in his long life, leaving hundreds of manuscripts to gather dust in his museum. The expense of Joseph Pitton de Tournefort’s path-breaking Elémens de botanique (1694) effectively curtailed the publication of the Paris Academy of Sci-ences’ history of plants. The problem was not simply the cost of financing these books but also the attitude of patrons towards the printed word. Museums and botanical gardens fitted readily into court culture and urban life, making natural history a fashionable pursuit among the upper classes. In contrast, the lengthy humanist encyclopaedias of nature served the community of professional naturalists more than the interests of their patrons.
Both the culture of display and the culture of erudition shaped natural history as a discipline. With the decline of the courts in the eighteenth century natural history moved into the salons, coffee-houses, and provincial academies. Enthusiasts flocked to the public lectures in the royal gardens in Paris and eagerly consumed the more accessible natural histories, written in vernacular lan-guages, that introduced them to new taxonomic systems. While the social world in which natural history first emerged did not last, certain practices associated with it continued. Naturalists such as Buffon were concerned with expanding their audience, just as Renaissance scholars such as Gabrieli had worried about finding an audience for their work. When the Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus reformulated the study of plants in the early eighteenth century by renaming them, he did not neglect to celebrate the names of worthy patrons who advanced the study of natural history. They, like the ‘Fathers of Botany’ - naturalists whose con-tributions Linnaeus deemed significant - were to be immortalized in binomial nomenclature. ‘Those Emperors and Kings shall enjoy everlasting remembrance who have founded Public Gardens, endowed professional chairs of Botany, sent Botanists in the inter-ests of science into foreign lands’, he wrote in his Critica botánica (1737).25 Patrons were just as important as naturalists; without them, the study of nature could not progress. Situated between the Renaissance court and the Enlightenment salon, between the universities and the academies, the study of nature developed into the discipline of natural history.


74 Paula Findlen


Further reading
Eamon, William, ‘Science and popular culture in sixteenth century Italy: the professors of secrets and their books’, Sixteenth-Century Journal, 16 (1985), pp. 471-85.
Findlen, Paula, ‘Controlling the experiment: rhetoric, court patronage and the experimental method of Francesco Redi’, History of Science, 31 (1993); PP- 35-64-
Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific Culture in Early Modem Italy (Berkeley, CA, 1994).
Houghton, Walter E., Jr., ‘The English virtuoso in the seventeenth cen-tury’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 3 (1942), pp. 51-73, 190-219. Impey, Oliver, and MacGregor, Arthur, (eds.), The Origins of Museums:
The Cabinet of Curiosities in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century Europe (Oxford, 1985).
Kenseth, Joy (ed.), The Age of the Marvelous (Hanover, NH, 1991).
Lux, David, Patronage and Royal Science in Seventeenth-Century France:
The Académie de Physique in Caen (Ithaca, NY, 1989).
MacGregor, Arthur (ed.), Trade scant’s Rarities: Essays on the Foundation of the Ashmolean Museum 1683 with a Catalogue of the Surviving Early Collections (Oxford, 1983).
Pomian, Krzysztof, Collectors and Curiosities: Paris and Venice, isoo-1800, trans. Elizabeth Wiles-Portier (London, 1990).
Sarton, George, ‘Natural history’, in his Appreciation of Ancient and Medi-eval Science During the Renaissance (Philadelphia, 1955), pp. 52-132.
Siraisi, Nancy G., ‘Life sciences and medicine in the Renaissance world’, in Anthony Grafton (ed.), Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance Culture (Washington, DC, 1993), pp. 169-97.
Stroup, Alice, A Company of Scientists: Botany, Patronage, and Community at the Seventeenth-Century Parisian Royal Academy of Sciences (Berkeley, 1990).


KATIE WHITAKER
.  i


5 The culture of curiosity

The study and collection of natural objects in the seventeenth cen-tury was undertaken as part of a broad interest in rarities and won-ders of all sorts, natural and artificial. Natural histories such as Robert Plot’s Natural History of Oxfordshire (London, 1677) included treatments of many not strictly natural phenomena such ' as the houses of the local gentry and the antiquarian remains of the area. Similarly, antiquarian histories such as Thomas Fuller’s History of the Worthies of England (London, 1662) included such natural subjects as natural wonders and medicinal herbs. Both natural and artificial rarities, or ‘curiosities’ as they were called, filled the collections that were eagerly formed by gentlemen and scholars who described themselves as ‘curiosi’ or ‘virtuosi’. My dis-cussion of these curiosi will concentrate on England where the cul-ture of curiosity was particularly pronounced.
Curiosi were aristocrats, gentlemen and aspiring gentlemen, dis-persed through the counties of England in their homes in the summer, but converging on London iri the winter where they attended meetings of the Royal Society. Predominantly land- owners, they also included clergymen, lawyers, university men, physicians, wealthy merchants, and apothecaries. Curiosity was considered an important attribute for an accomplished gentleman to possess. It was an attitude of mind involving a fascination and admiration for the rare, novel, surprising, and outstanding in all spheres of life. Young gentlemen were trained in curiosity by making the grand tour on the Continent. Often accompanied by a tutor, they followed standard routes to view the many curiosities described in their guidebooks. They returned to England as fully- fledged curiosi, bringing back rarities of nature and art which formed the basis of their collections of curiosities. They settled into the life-style characteristic of curiosi, travelling to seek out and view rarities, displaying rarities in their houses, gardens, and estates, and visiting each other to view and discuss these rarities.1 These curiosi formed an educated culture whose outlook on the world must be understood if we are to appreciate how natural objects were studied in the period.

75



76 Katie Whitaker


Curiosity and wonder
Curiosity in the seventeenth century played the same role as would the sublime in the eighteenth century: it was the standard of appreciation of nature and art.2 Appreciation of the sublime was to involve astonishment, awe, and terror, felt in the face of vast-ness, power, and grandeur. Curiosity, on the other hand, involved wonder and admiration at' whatever was rare or outstanding, whether in size, shape, skill of workmanship, or in any other respect. Such rarities formed the curiosities whose unusual and outstanding qualities curiosi admired and wondered at.
Thus rare exotic animals and birds were curiosities which pro-duced wonder: the first rhinoceros to be brought to England was regarded as ‘a very wonderfull creature’ for its unusual appearance, size, and strength. A curious waterfowl produced wonder by its remarkable eating habits: ‘It would eat as much fish as its whole body weighed, I never saw so unsatiable a devourer, I admir’d how it could swallo[w] so much & swell no bigger: I believe it to be the most voracious creature in nature, it was not biger [sic] than a More hen’.3
Natural curiosities also produced wonder by their beauty and the apparent art of their contrivance. Butterflies in particular were wonderful for their ‘curiously variegated Wings, admirably beauti-ful for their Colours or Texture’ and shells were admired as ‘engraved and painted with various Colours and Figures’, ‘curi-ously striated, with transverse Lines’, or ‘very curiously variegated, with triangular Figures white upon black’. The similarity of nature to art could become so wonderful as to produce incredulity, as happened in the case of the Chinese chair, one of the greatest curi-osities of the Royal Society’s museum. Supposedly made from the natural growth of a root, it led one viewer to conclude that ‘I cannot possibly believe that art did not come to assist, so elegantly is it carved’.4
Natural features of the countryside were also curiosities to be appreciated with wonder. The hills of Derbyshire were appreciated as the ‘most prodigious high mountains as ever my eye beheld’, and one of the caves there was ‘esteemed one of the wonders of England’ because of ‘the vast largeness of it’ which made it a true rarity. At Knaresborough in Yorkshire, a petrifying spring? another rare natural feature, was a curiosity considered ‘admirable’.5
Experiments and mechanical inventions were also seen as won-derful curiosities. Thus the virtuoso Robert Boyle (1627-91) reported experiments which inspired wonder in his ‘Tracts of A Discovery of the Admirable Rarefaction of the Air’ and ‘The


The culture of curiosity 77




Figure 5.1 A selection of natural curiosities. From James Petiver,
Gazophylacium naturae et artis (London, 1702-6).

admirably Differing Extension of the same Quantity of Air rarified and compressed’. Visitors to the Royal Society wondered at the experiments which they saw there: the Duchess of Newcastle (i624?~74), writer of poems, plays, and works on natural philos-ophy, was ‘full of admiration’ when she visited the Society and was shown some ‘fine experiments ... of Colours, Loadstones,


78 Katie Whitaker


Microscope, and of liquors: among others, of one that did while she was there turn a piece of roast mutton into pure blood - which was very rare’.6
Unusual human beings were also appreciated as wonderful curi-osities. A ‘native Irishman, Edmund Mallory . . . two yards and a half tall’ was considered ‘a wonderful sight’, and the Cumbrian clergyman, botanist, and antiquarian William Nicolson (1655- 1727) admired the ‘wondrous feats performed by one John Valerius, a German, born without Arms’ whose curious drawings were displayed at the Blue Boar in London.7
Houses and their gardens could be rare curiosities and so inspire wonder. The virtuoso John Evelyn (1620-1706), visiting the house of Lord Sunderland, found that ‘above all are admirable & mag-nificent the severall ample Gardens furnish’d with the Choicest fruite in England, & exquisitely kept: Great plenty of Oranges, and other Curiosities: The Parke full of Fowle & especialy Hernes [herons]’. Similarly, the Yorkshire antiquarian and collector Ralph Thoresby (1658-1725) admired ‘the greatest house in England, viz. Audley-end, a vast building, or rather town walled in; it is adorned with so many cupolas and turrets above, walks and trees below, as render it a most admirably pleasant seat’.8
Even ordinary objects could become noteworthy curiosities if they were associated with strange and wonderful stories. An apparently unremarkable fly in Ralph Thoresby’s collection was in fact a rare curiosity because of its wonderful history: it was ‘sent me by the Reverend Mr. Hall of Fishlake, An. 1699 with this remarkable Account, That in May the same Year, at Kerton in Lincolnshire, the Sky seem’d to darken North-Westward ... as though it had been with a Shower of Hailstones or Snow; but when it came near the Town it appeared to be a prodigious Swarm of these Flies, which went with such a Force towards the South-East, that Persons were forced to turn their Backs of them, to the Wonder of those that were abroad and saw them’.9 The fly was a curiosity which would inspire wonder in visitors to Thoresby’s collection when they were told its strange history.
Curiosities could also inspire wonder by their richness and cost. In the Jewel House of the Tower of London, William Nicolson

Figure 5.2 An admirable artificial curiosity: Enston Waterworks formed by Thomas Bushell Esq. from ‘a Rock so wonderfully contrived by Nature her self, that he thought it worthy of all imaginable advancement by Art'. A house with a banqueting room looks out over the ‘Ingenious Contrivances’ of the waterworks, including a vertical ‘Column of water rising about 14 foot, designed to toss a Ball’, streams of water which ‘sportively wet’ any person on the island, and two spouts designed to wet the back and legs of the curioso as he retreated over the bridge. From Robert Plot, Natural History of Oxfordshire (Oxford, 1677).


The culture of curiosity 79









8o Katie Whitaker


admired ‘The Rich Crown of State ... in which there’s a large Emerald (green) of 7 Inches round; the finest Pearl in the world, pawned by King Charles II to the Dutch for 4oooo￡ and a Rubie (given by the Jewes of London to the late King James, when he was Duke of York) of an inestimable value’.10
The wonder felt by curiosi was quite unlike the awe and amaze-ment with which the sublime was later to be appreciated. The sub-lime inspired the strongest emotions which the mind was capable of feeling. In this delightful state of astonishment, as Edmund Burke described in his Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (London, 1757), the mind is overcome and made incapable of reasoning.11 The state of wonder caused by curiosities in the seventeenth century was completely different from this: curious wonder was reasoned and articulate. Curiosi understood what they found wonderful and expressed this in their writing and conversation. Exact descriptions of curiosities were recorded which stated precisely what about them was con-sidered wonderful. Thus when John Evelyn viewed a rhinoceros he noted in detail all its outstanding and wonderful features, for-ming a reasoned and articulate expression of wonder:
It more ressembled [sic] a huge enormous Swine, than any other Beast amongst us; That which was most particular and extraordinary, was the placing of her small Eyes in the very center of her cheekes and head, her Eares in her neck ... her Leggs neere as big about as an ordinarie mans wa[i]st . . . but what was most wonderfull, was the extraordinary bulke and Circumference of her body, which though very Young . . could not be lesse than 20 foote in compasse: she had a set of most dreadfull teath, which were extraordinarily broad, and deepe in her Throate . . . but in my opinion nothing was so extravagant as the Skin of the beast, which hung downe on her ha[u]nches . . . loose like so much Coach leather . . . and these lappets of stiff skin, began to be studdied with impenetrable Scales, like a Target of coate of maile, loricated like Armor . . . T’was certainly a very wonderfull creature, of immense strength in the neck, and nose especially.12
As part of this articulate expression of wonder, curiosities were compared so as to reveal what was really outstanding and rare. The German traveller Zacharias Conrad von Uffenbach, who vis-ited England in 1710, described Hans Sloane’s collection of corals as ‘especially charming’ since the corals ‘were not only of unusual size but also quality’, but he criticized the ‘great cornua Hammon- is’ in John Woodward’s collection since ‘their size did not equal those we saw in Limburg at Herr Reimer’s’. The clergyman John Covel (1638-1722), in his northern travels, was ‘particularly ple-ased with Gingling-Cove and Reeking-Cove, near Ingleton, which (he saies) outdoe Oakey-Hole in Somersetshire and all the wonders of the Peak’. At Kensington Palace William Nicolson ‘spent two


The culture of curiosity 81


Hours in walking about the fine Garden, Wilderness and Green- House’ and viewed the ‘Queen’s Dressing-Room hung with Neddie-work, in Satin . . . And the great Gallery stored with excel-lent Pictures’ concluding with a comparison, that the ‘whole [was] much Superiour to the Palace at St. James’s’.13
In addition to detailed description and comparison, curious wonder also essentially involved the attempt to understand its object. Wonder occurred in the face of a phenomenon which was not understood and led the curioso to speculate and philosophize on the causes of curiosities. Thus when Ralph Thoresby went to see some wonderful corn which had been ‘rained down the chim-ney upon the Lord’s-day seven-night’, he was led to consider ‘What it may signify, and whether it doth proceed from natural causes .... or preternatural’. Similarly, when the antiquary and collector Lord Coleraine (1636-1708) described the remarkable burning of a haystack at Bath to the curious collector William Courten (1642-1702), his admiration at the monstrous occurrence led him to philosophize on its cause:
a Great Hay stack att the Bath . . . takeing fire of ittself about August last indangerd the whole Towne, allarmd the inhabitants, occasiond much discourse & admiration att the flying out of itt in great peices [s/c] of this (then inflamed matter) with a Crackling Noyse, & desperat[e]ly scalding while itt burnt. Noe doubt butt ye Tendrest herbs & ye dews w** fall upon ym too are much impregnated with the sulphureous Attomes ariseing from ye Springs Thereabouts, so yl ’tis no wonder yl ys Grass at y* Bath being layd up not thoroughly dry should from the abundance of those minerall exhalations (both in & about itt) take a more y" ordinary heate wch did att once bake itt hard & light itt, as a Cake of Seacole is accended & concocted.14
This reasoned articulate wonder which sought understanding was contrasted by curiosi with speechless astonishment in which the mind was baffled and brought to a stand, unable to exercise its judgement. True wonder was felt by the Christian curioso who observed ‘the true Works and wonderful Contrivances of the Supreme Author’. Unreasoning astonishment in which causes were not understood was seen as the fate of the non-Christian whose superstition led him ‘to think all strange things Supernatu- rall’ and not to distinguish the wonders of nature from genuine miracles: ‘To behold a Rainbow at night’ was a curiosity to be wondered at, but was ‘no prodigie unto a Philosopher’. Wonder was a religious activity: whereas vain amazement led to super-stition, just admiration of God’s works was a religious duty, and the viewing of natural curiosities led to admiration of the wisdom and power of God. Thus Ralph Thoresby, wondering at the sights which he saw in the Peak District, was led to admire God’s power: ‘God, who is truly .aupxxTouQYO., the only worker


82 Katie Whitaker
 >-
of wonders, has more manifested his might in this than in any other county in England, such the heaps of wonders therein’. Curious natural philosophy dealt with the true wonders of God’s works and was ‘Next to Gods Word ... the most Soveraign Antidote to expell the poison of Superstition; and ... the most approved food to nourish faith’.14
The need to experience Christian wonder and avoid vain super-stition led curiosi to have a serious concern with the accuracy of reports of curiosities: only reports which were ascertained to be true could produce Christian wonder at the real works of the Creator. Accouiits of curiosities thus had to conform to stringent standards of accuracy. They had to be ‘particular’, describing all the details of the phenomenon minutely and circumstantially. They had to show care and diligence which ensured their reliability.16 This accu-rate reporting of wonders formed a new style of natural history, characteristic of the period.
Curious natural histories
Natural histories were written within this culture of wondering curiosity. They described curiosities, treating novelties, rarities, and wonders, and ignoring the common and ordinary. This bias can be clearly seen in the Natural History of Oxfordshire written by Robert Plot (1640-96), a commoner of University College, Oxford, who was to become the first custodian of the Ashmolean Museum and professor of chemistry at Oxford in 1683. Plot’s treatment of plants and animals was not a complete catalogue including the common, but described only ‘such, as either have not been noted before, are very unusual, or have somthing [sic] extraordinary attending them’ (p. 175). The other chapters of his natural history similarly concentrated on rare and wonderful phenomena.
Natural histories of a particular geographical region were a popular genre in the period, and many curiosi wrote local natural histories modelled on Robert Plot’s Natural History of Oxfordshire. Plot himself wrote The Natural History of Staffordshire (Oxford, 1686). The Wiltshire gentleman and antiquarian John Aubrey (1626-97) wrote The Natural History of Wiltshire (written between 1656 and 1691; published London, 1847, ed. J. Britton) and, having been empowered to survey Surrey by a licence from the royal cosmographer John Ogilby, performed a perambulation of that county in 1673 which resulted in The Natural History and Antiquities of the County of Surrey (published posthumously in London, 1718-19). The Lancastrian physician Charles Leigh (1662-1701?) wrote The Natural History of Lancashire, Cheshire, and the Peak, in Derbyshire (Oxford, 1700), and The Natural


The culture of curiosity 83




Figure 5.3 An illustration in the curious accurate style showing specimens in great detail. The provision of a scale increases the impression of accuracy and also enables the viewer to wonder at the contrast in size between the hippopotamus and the armadillo. From Nehemiah Grew, Mus.um Regalis Societatis (London, 1681).


84 Katie Whitaker


History of Northamptonshire (London, 1712) was provided by John Morton (1671?—1726), a Northamptonshire clergyman, naturalist, and antiquarian.
All of these local natural histories concentrated, in true curious style, on rarities and wonders, taking curiosities of all sorts as their subject matter without strict specialization in natural phenomena. They treated all the topics of interest to curiosi: mineral waters; formed stones; plants; animals; notable experiments; mechanical inventions; unusual methods used in agriculture, mining, and manufacture; the houses, gardens, and estates of the gentry and nobility; and antiquities. The rare and fine of all of these subjects formed the interest of curiosi and the subject matter of natural histories.
In describing wonderful curiosities-, natural histories adopted the new style of accurate reporting which demonstrated the truth of the wonders which they described and thus fitted them to be objects of the true Christian wonder of the curioso. The natural histories of Plot and others were full of matter-of-fact reports of detailed obser-vations which involved great circumstantial detail demonstrating their accuracy. Measurements were frequently reported, providing further proof of accurate reporting, and illustrations were made as realistic as possible. This concern for detailed accurate description distinguished curious natural historians from their sixteenth- century predecessors whose works had not conformed to these standards of description and who were now criticized as insuf-ficiently careful, or ‘curious’, in their observation.17
Natural histories were written in the ‘miscellaneous’ or ‘essay’ style as a further device to cause wonder in the reader. This style avoided pedantry and was seen as particularly suitable for the expression of the wit of a gentleman.18 It was characterized by vari-ety and contrast: very varied topics were treated without any sys-tematic organization and these different discussions were closely juxtaposed so as to produce striking contrasts. Thus, for instance, Robert Plot in his Natural History of Oxfordshire turned from the dramatic death of a scholar of Wadham College struck by lightning to support John Beale’s suggestion that the weather be recorded every day so as to learn ‘how far the positions of the Planets, or other symptoms or concomitants, are indicative of weathers’. Changing the subject again, he proceeded to describe in detail ‘try- als’ made on echoes to see whether they differed by night and day, or with a pistol or the human voice. He emphasized the contrast between these different subjects by introducing this last discussion with ‘Next the Tragedies ... it will not be amiss to present the Reader with some of the sports of Nature, and entertain him awhile with the Nymph Echo’ (pp. 5-7). All these different


The culture of curiosity 85


discussions were contained in just two pages which served to emphasize the contrast between them.
In adopting the miscellaneous style of writing, involving variety and contrast, writers of natural histories encouraged wonder in their readers. Variety and contrast were the principal techniques used by poets and painters in the period to cause delight and wonder, which were seen as the aim of poetry and art.19 Thus natu-ral histories were written in a style designed to cause wonder in the reader. They provided rare and surprising material for the wondering speculation and conversation of their curious readers. The accurate style of their descriptions ensured that their reports were true and thus that the wonder was genuine.
Curious collections
Curiosi collected rarities and curiosities avidly, filling their houses and gardens with them. From the hot house in the garden, full of rare exotic plants, to the gallery of paintings in the house, via the curious echo on the stairs, the whole house and garden of a curioso was, like that of the Norwich physician Sir Thomas Browne, ‘a Paradise and Cabinet of rarities’.20
In addition to the curiosities spread through the house and garden, curiosi generally had a room or sequence of rooms in which their curiosities were concentrated. Here curiosities could be viewed by visitors and form the subject of their curious Conversations. These collections or museums had great variety of content: rarities of all sorts, natural and artificial, were included without great specialization. The collection of Ralph Thoresby, described in his Musaeum Thoresbyanum (London, 1713), is typical in its broad range of curious contents. There were more than two thousand coins and medals, Hebrew, Greek, Roman, British of all ages, and European. The human rarities included a fragment of an Egyptian mummy and the hand and arm of the Marquis of Montrose which ‘seems really to have been the very Hand that wrote the famous Epitaph ... for K. Charles 1st’. The collection contained wonderful monsters such as a ‘young Cat (littered at Leedes) with Six Feet and Two Tails having two distinct Bodies from the mid Back’. There were specimens from exotic animals, such as the ‘Foot of a great White Bear, eight Inches broad’ and the ‘Pizle [penis] of a Whale, in Length a Yard and a Quarter’, as well as a crocodile almost six feet long. There were shells and butterflies remarkable for their beauty, ‘very rare exotic Plants’, ‘Manna gathered in the Wilderness, where the Children of Israel travelled’ and a ‘Fragment of the Royal-Oak at Boscobell, where King Charles II was miraculously


86 Katie Whitaker




Figure 5.4 The collection of Olaus Worm is typical in displaying variety and contrast in the arrangement of the specimens. From the ceiling hang a canoe, a bear, and various fishes and birds. The contents of the shelves on the right include a globe, statues, fish, antlers, birds, corals, stones, fruits, and a zither. From Olaus Worm, Museum Wormianum seu Historia Rerum Rariorum (Leyden, 1655).

preserved’. The collection contained fossil shells, beautiful agates, and mathematical instruments which included a telescope, two globes, and an ivory multiplication table. There was an Indian tomahawk and a Turkish scimitar, a ‘Tooth-brush from Mecca’ and a pair of gloves which had belonged to King James I. There were statues, seals, ‘Heathen Deities, Amulets, Charms’, and ‘Matters relating to the Romish Superstition’, including a ‘Sur-prizing Representation of the Trinity’. There were paintings, prints and maps, ancient manuscripts, early printed books and rare editions of the Bible. The collection also contained many Roman antiquities including altars, bracelets, mosaic pavements, urns, lamps, and bricks.


The culture of curiosity 87
.: >:
Although catalogues of collections presented their curiosities arranged into kinds, the collection itself was governed by no such systematic classification. Natural and artificial objects were dis-played together. Shells, formed stones, medals, and corals might all be contained in the drawers of the same cabinet and animals from all over the world were hung together on the ceiling. The curiosities were crammed into a small space where they filled the walls and ceiling, as well as the drawers and shelves of cabinets.21
This close juxtaposition of very different things crammed together in a confined space was the desired effect sought by curi-ous collectors. Widely diverse objects were brought into close proximity in collections so that their variety was emphasized and the contrast between them could he better appreciated. This con-trast and variety produced wonder in the viewer. Thus William Nicolson felt wonder at the famous collection of the London phys-ician Hans Sloane (1660-1753) in ‘four large Rooms crammed with so much variety’: ‘The collection indeed, since the Accession of the whole Stores of the late Mr. Charlton’s Rarities of all kinds and Mr. Dendridge’s Insects, Dr. Plukenet’s dryed Plants, &c. is wonderful’.22
Collections were designed to provoke wonder in the viewer. They contained the rarities which curiosi found wonderful and were arranged in such a way that the variety and contrast of the rarities were displayed and so inspired wonder. The systematic arrangement of objects into kinds according to some method of classification, which was adopted in eighteenth-century natural his-tory collections, would have been inappropriate in a seventeenth- century curious collection, since an object surrounded by similar but slightly different species would have seemed unsurprising and ordinary. Instead, specimens were arranged to display their variety and contrast, and thus cause wonder. Collections were sites for admiration at the rarities of the world and wondering conversation between curiosi, and their arrangement and contents were designed for this purpose. A curious collection was ‘a repository of rare and select objects of natural history and art so curiously and elegantly arranged’ that wonder and admiration were provoked.23
This artful arrangement of curiosities in the collection or museum made it the best place for viewing curiosities. Here the strangeness of curiosities was displayed by the close juxtaposition of contrasting specimens, whereas in nature no such contrast could be readily made. The rarity and variety of curiosities could thus be better appreciated in a collection than in nature, and curiosi thought that curiosities were improved by being placed in a well arranged collection: Lord Coleraine admired William Courten’s ability to ‘bring home whatsoever you found good, & make itt better by yor ranging itt so judiciously in your Apartements’.24


88 Katie Whitaker


In a collection objects were brought together from all over the world and displayed in a single place where the whole of Creation could be seen in a single glance. In thus bringing the curiosities from the whole world into one place, the collector recreated Para-dise before the animals were dispersed at the Fall, and he and his visitors could view the whole world just as Adam had done after the Creation. This idea of the collection as a recreation of Paradise can be clearly seen in the anonymous ‘poem occasion’d by the viewing Dr. Sloans musaeum London Dec: 1712’.25 The poem begins with a description of Adam viewing Creation in Paradise:
When the fi[r]st man in Paradise had place He lookd around and viewd all natures face The world had gather’d to its ma[s]ters view
Its severall kind each wondrous creature knew. ■/
Here Quadrupeds in all their shap[e]s surround
Their knowing Lord and Reptiles there abound
Obsequious fishes press to touch the Shoar
And all its birds the Airy Region bore
Its vegetable world the Earth sustain’d
and various mineralls its womb containd.
The poet recounted how Adam had named the creatures in Para-
dise and proceeded to compare his own experience in Sloane’s col-
lection to Adam’s:
The admiring Lord ye wide Creation knew and gave to ev’ry part its name anew.
Thy crowded world thus do I now survay wishing with wondring Eyes for longer day Thus while I hear thee name each beauteous part Admire the maker’s and the owners Art.
The poet viewed the collection, Sloane’s world, and wondered at
it in the same way as Adam had admired Creation. Sloane himself
was likened to Adam naming the creatures.
Sloane’s collection was the world collected in one place, hidden indoors unseen by the sun, but seen by the poet with such enjoy-ment and wonder that he wished that time would stand still. God had spent six days creating the world which was collected here, and the poet proposed that six days could well be enjoyed in view-ing it. This wondering viewing of the world was to continue on the seventh day of the week: the first six days were ‘enjoy’d’ in wondering at God’s work, but the Sabbath by contrast was to be ‘spent’ in this way as a religious duty:
Phoebus the world to which so fast you fly Collected here you pass regardless by Time has forgot for scenes of blood to go26 And sure it might for scenes of knowledge too


The culture of curiosity 89


If six whole days ye new born world employ’d Six might in viewing thine be well enjoy’d Spent as seventh too by heavens Command In wondring at ye great Creators hand Here all his works in beauty rang’d appear If theres a paradise on Earth tis here.
Sloane’s collection was further likened to Paradise in its preser-vation of plants by drying. The world after the Fall had seasons in which plants withered, but Sloane’s art preserved the colours of plants throughout the year:
In Nature plants decay’d and with[e]red seen here kinder art makes each an Ever green.
Collections of dried plants provided a ‘Hortus Hyemalis’ where the plants kept their colour regardless of the season. This meant that they could be viewed in flower even in the winter, just as in the Garden of Eden where it was believed that there had been no sea-sons, and the plants and trees had borne fruit and flowers continuously.27
The collection was presented as a terrestrial paradise where the collector’s industry had brought together curiosities from all over the world and his art had arranged them beautifully. All of Cre-ation could be seen in a glance, as Adam had done before the crea-tures were dispersed at the Fall. The visitor felt wonder at the works of God, just as Adam had done, and admired the collector’s art in collecting and preserving the objects, as well as the art of God who had originally made them.
This recreation of Paradise in the collection made hazardous and difficult travel no longer necessary. Products from all over the world were brought together so that the curioso could visit nature by visiting the collection:
No more the Traveller from pole to pole Shall search the seas or round the globe shall rowll Safe from the dangers of the deep may be and visit nature while he visits thee
Here Lappland Bears with Borneos Quantury28 meet Those guests of Ice These once dissolv’d in heat Whales from the north come down to visit day and flying fishes meet them in their way.
Since collections were the ideal place for viewing curiosities there was no incentive to study objects in their natural environ-ments which only tended to diminish their curiosity. The activities of the curious centred on the collection where the rarities of the world were brought together and could best be viewed and dis-cussed with wonder. Thus when Ralph Thoresby visited William Nicolson in 1694, the two men ‘presently retired from the company


90 Katie Whitaker


to his museum, where he showed me his delicate collection of natural curiosities . . . [and] some coins and medals’. When they later went out to visit the local sights, they soon cut short their walk, ‘longing to be again in that little paradise, his study’.29
The curious way of life centred on the study or library. Here the gentleman curioso collected together the rarities and wonders of the world. Here he and his friends met to admire the works of nature and art and to examine his many books and manuscripts describing natural and artificial curiosities. Here they conversed in curious style, expressing their wonder and admiration, philoso-phizing on causes and telling the stories which made objects curious.

Further reading
Houghton, Walter E., Jr., ‘The English virtuoso in the seventeenth cen-tury’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 3 (1942), pp. 51-73, 190-219. Hunter, Michael, John Aubrey and the Realm of Learning (London, 1975).
Science and Society in Restoration England (Cambridge, 1981). Establishing the New Science: The Experience of the Early Royal Society
(Woodbridge, 1989).
Impey, Oliver and MacGregor, Arthur (eds.), The Origins of Museums: The Cabinet of Curiosities in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century Europe (Oxford, 1985).
Levine, J., Dr. Woodward’s Shield: History, Science and Satire in Augustan Eng/and (Berkeley, .977).
MacGregor, Arthur (ed.), Tradescant’s Rarities: Essays on the Foundation of the Ashmolean Museum (Oxford, 1983).
Pomian, Krzysztof, Collectors and Curiosities: Paris and Venice, 1500-1800, trans. Elizabeth Wiles-Portier (Cambridge, 1990).
Prest, John, The Garden of Eden: The Botanic Garden and the Re-Creation of Paradise (New Haven, 1981).
Schnapper, Antoine, Le ge'ant, la licorne, la tulipe: Collections et collectionne-urs dans la France du XVIF siècle (Paris, 1988).


)


HAROLD J. COOK

6

Physicians and natural history

For reasons pertaining to both the ‘art’ and the ‘science’ of medi-cine, large numbers of physicians contributed to natural history in early modern Europe. For their ars - the skill or method of treating disease - they needed to know about the uses of plants, animals, and minerals. For their scientia - the knowledge of health and dis-ease - physicians shifted the foundations of medical learning from philosophical disputation to investigations of nature. Early modern physicians increasingly came to believe that pursuing ‘matters of fact’ rather than correct reasoning would provide the most certain basis for both their art and science. Both their professional con-cerns and intellectual outlook, therefore, caused many physicians to take a deep interest in helping to develop natural history7.
While there were many kinds of people who practised medi-cine - and who did so charitably, part time, or as the mainstay of their living - by and large the physicians were the only ones who had foririal degrees from universities. One should allow some exceptions for surgeons, who in some places (notably France and Italy) could enrol in university faculties of medicine. But in gen- eral, it was the physicians who were distinguished from all others by the fact that they possessed the medical doctorate, the MD. Moreover, of the four university faculties - arts, law, theology, and medicine - only medicine gave students what we might call a graduate training in natural science (to use somewhat anachronistic terms). Many other people might pick up an excellent knowledge of nature from their studies in the arts faculties, or from reading and discussing matters with private tutors, or even on their own; but physicians who possessed an MD had been formally certified as men (the universities then excluding women) who were well grounded in natural philosophy. The possession of the MD test-ified as no other certificate could that the physician understood the intellectual foundations of ‘physic’, a term derived from the Greek word for nature, 4>uoio.
Whether with regard to their study of the foundation of health and disease or their cultivation of the art of treating disease, phys-icians possessed a keen professional interest in all developments related to a knowledge of nature. One late seventeenth-century

91



92 Harold J. Cook


English physician, probably Christopher Merrett (1614-95), neatly summed up this concern when he wrotethat: ‘The word Physician, derived from the Greek (jwotxóo, is plainly and fully rendred by the word Naturalist, (that is) one well vers’d in the full extent of Nature, and Natural things; hereunto add the due, and skilful preparation and application of them to Mens Bodies, in order to their Health, and prolongation of Life, and you have a comprehen-sive Definition of a Physician.’ Such a physician-naturalist, Merrett continued, needed to possess a studied and experimental knowl-edge of many things: vegetables and other simples (such as waters, oils, spirits, and salts), diseases, medicines, manufactures, min-erals, animals, earths, stones, etc. Only such a person ‘is able to advise fitting Diet, and Remedies, at all times and places’.1 While few physicians could hope to live up to Merrett’s ideals, many found themselves at least dabbling at being naturalists, since both their art and their science demanded it.
The search for medicináis
When it came to the art of treating diseases, the physicians of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries both developed a more exact-ing knowledge of ancient medicinal plants, animals, and minerals, and adapted a host of new remedies to their practices. The medie-val and early modern European pharmacopoeia borrowed very heavily from ancient sources. The most respectable sources for both simple and compound medicines, such as the so-Called Circa instans of Platearius (mid-twelfth century) or the Herbal of Rufinus (thirteenth century), elaborated and expanded on the work of Pliny the elder, Dioscorides (both of the first century CE), and other ancient authors.2 These medieval works continued to be studied and used right through the sixteenth century, and sometimes even thereafter. But the fifteenth-century intellectual movement in Western Europe known today as ‘humanism’ focused increasing attention on the ancient sources. By the later fifteenth century increasing numbers of humanists could handle ancient Greek, and even many with only Latin were involved in an energetic search for ancient manuscripts; moreover, following the appearance of humanist printers, both ancient Greek and Latin authors began to appear in printed editions based on very old manuscripts, making it possible for numerous learned physicians to scrutinize the orig-inal sources. This scrutiny of the ancient sources was spurred on by the common supposition that the most ancient knowledge of nature had been the best, it having decayed over the centuries.
Many early modern physicians therefore wished to return to the original sources for their medicines, in the belief that the ancients had possessed excellent remedies, the knowledge of which had


Physicians and natural history 93


been lost or corrupted over the centuries. To obtain the health-giving effects of ancient wisdom, many physicians felt compelled to re-examine classical prescriptions. The philological revolution of the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries - which brought into being both a renewed understanding of ancient languages and the development of new palaeographical techniques - made such a reconsideration of the earliest medical texts possible. As well- trained philologists, the medical humanists put their skills to work in arduous attempts to identify properly the' classical simples (that is, the individual ingredients used in medicines). But medical humanists quickly found that this work on ancient texts required long labours not only in the library, but in the garden and field as well.
For instance, countless people were involved in the search for the true theriac. The medicinal compound ‘theriac’ (the word being derived from the Greek word for a wild or venomous animal, and vernacularized in English as ‘treacle’) was thought to be a won-derfully effective antidote to all poisons and a general preservative against most diseases. A number of ancient authors before Galen (second century CE), and Galen himself, recommended the medi-cine and listed its ingredients. But theriac had an enormously com-plex formula; some of the ancient recipes for theriac compounded up to eighty-one simples. By the sixteenth century the annual mixing of theriac in certain cities was done with great ceremonial pomp in the midst of grand festivities, presided over by physicians and magistrates, and finally doled out to local apothecaries and merchants for sale elsewhere. ‘Venetian theriac’ became particu-larly well regarded, being distinguished by name in England and throughout Europe. Humanist physicians spent great efforts not only in determining the true directions for compounding theriac, but in attempts to identify accurately the true simples from which the ancients had made it. Some moaned that many of the classical simples were clearly missing in the mixtures sold as theriac in their own day, while others noted that many of the simples used in the modern compound were not definitively the same ones used by the ancients. Physicians therefore struggled to identify correctly the simples mentioned by the ancients by going back to the original sources and attempting to link precisely each Greek term with its modern equivalent. To do so took not only skill with languages and palaeography, but an ability to scour the markets, gardens, and fields for possible ingredients, bringing to bear a knowledge of botany, zoology, and mineralogy. The resulting arguments about the ingedients of theriac might make or break a physician’s
reputation. The intensive search for the authentic ancient remedies helped to bring about ‘a quiet revolution in simples’.3
An example of changes in the knowledge of one much sought


94 Harold J. Cook


after simple described by the ancients - and included in theriac - ' is the case of rhubarb. True rhubarb roots worked, it was thought, by purifying the humours via a gentle purge, having astringent as well as cathartic effects. But rhubarb’s place of origin in the East, as well as an accurate description of the living plant, were both uncertain. Humanist physicians did determine that many of the roots sold as rhubarb in the markets were not the real thing. Many of these plants, which seemed related to true rhubarb, were native to the Near East and were consequently cheaper and more common, but they had quite inferior medicinal effects. The investi-gations of sixteenth-century herbalists and merchants finally settled the origin of the true rhubarb as somewhere in China, but it was not for many long decades to come that an accurate botanical description of the true rhubarb could be had, much less a secure supply of the medicine.4 Further vigorous arguments abounded about which were the truly good serpent skins, bezoar stones, bits
of mummy, amber, and so forth.
The concern to find authentic ancient medicines also contributed to the attempts of Europeans to find new trade routes to the East. Since the most famous classical pharmaceutical authors, such as Theophrastus and Dioscorides, had lived in the eastern Mediter-ranean, and had access to simples brought from much further east, the importation of drugs (often included under the general term ‘spices’) became a necessity for those who wished to use ancient remedies. The late medieval pepper and spice trade with the Levant, especially with Beirut and Alexandria, brought great riches to the Venetians, Genoese, and Catalans. But the Europeans of the Atlantic seaboard began their rapacious seaborne enterprises not only in search of gold and other Christians to help in the struggle against Islam, but in search of new routes for importing Eastern spices. First the Portuguese and Spaniards, and then the Dutch and English, forced their way into the south and east Asian trade in spices over the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by finding and sailing the route around Africa, and so partially short-circuiting the overland caravan trade to the Mediterranean. By the early seventeenth century, as Europeans came to control not only the carrying trade between Asia and Europe but the regions and people where the spices were produced, the amount of imported spices grew rapidly, while the prices began to plum-met.5 Large quantities of the produce of Asia appeared in Euro-pean markets, including a tremendous variety of simples that had been known to the ancients but which had been infrequently avail-able to Western Europeans.
Like the investigations of ancient texts, however, the importation of ancient remedies brought unintended consequences. For instance, Columbus’ belief that by travelling west he had found the


Physicians and natural history 95


eastern source of classical simples such as rhubarb and cinnamon eventually proved wrong. But the growing recognition that the western lands were a new world rather than the eastern part of the old did not mean that Europeans gave up the quest to import medicines from there; it only meant that they would have to search out medical uses for plants about which they had previously known nothing. Soon, other botanicals - usually adopted from local custom - began to find their way to Europe in increasing amounts. Most dramatically, tobacco became a successful new import that caused considerable controversy among physicians about whether the supposed medicinal benefits of smoking it outweighed its drying stinks. At the same time, European sugar cultivation - important for medicinal compounds as well as confections - spread with the help of slave labour from the Mediterranean to the Canary Islands and then to the West Indies. And other new addictions came from Asia and north Africa in the seventeenth century, sold first as healthful medicinal drinks: chocolate, tea, and coffee.6
Indeed, by the mid-seventeenth century both the English and Dutch East India Companies were making a habit of introducing exotic botanicals to the European market by publicizing their med-icinal uses. For instance, a series of short pamphlets running from 1672 to 1695 attributed to one John Peachey (apparently published at the behest of an importer), introduced English readers to a host of new medical simples: Molucco, Virginian, Maldiva and Malabar nuts; Angola, Barbado, Russia and Mexico seeds; roots called nean, ipecacuanha, serapies (or salep), and casmunar (or, in another version, cassummuniar); calumba wood and a wood called lignum.nephriticum; and bananas, Bengala bean, Bermuda berries, perigua, cassiny, cylonian plant, blatta Bizantina, and serpent stones.7 The Dutch physician Cornells Bontekoe (1640-85) earned the epithet ‘the tea doctor’ because of his book on the healthful effects of tea, recommending eight to ten cups a day at a minimum, and fifty to two hundred a day as reasonable; rumours abounded (but have so far remained unproven) that he had close connections to the major importer of tea, the Dutch East India Company.8
Among the most popular of the new medicináis were guaiacum and cinchona bark. Guaiacum was brought to Europe very soon after Columbus founded Santo Domingo in the mid-1490s, being a remedy used by the indigenous people there to treat syphilis; it was first popularized in Europe by Ulrich von Hutten’s De guiad medicina et morbo Gallico (‘On the Medicine of Guaiacum and the French Disease’) (1519). Also known as ‘holy wood’, legendary stories developed about how it came to be used by Europeans, associating it with Apollo and a holy celebration on Hispanola in which those infected with syphilis were cured by water sprinkled from the branches of a guaiacum tree. Europeans used fine


96 Harold J. Cook


shavings taken from the wood, which they boiled for a long time in water, then drinking the cooled infusion; at the same time the patient was put on a strict regimen. The great banking house of Fugger, among others, became deeply involved in the trade in guaiacum wood. As people in Europe learned to identify the true guaiacum from the texture of the bark and the colour of the wood, whole logs became the preferred form in which the wood was shipped.9 The other extraordinarily successful new import, cin-chona (also known as ‘Jesuit’s bark’, or simply ‘the bark’), was first imported from Peru around the early 1650s. It also quickly took on a legendary history to explain why Europeans adopted it from the local people (being attributed to the healing of the Count-ess of Chinchon), and was soon being marketed by Jesuit pharmac-ies and others. The bark, again taken in an infusion, worked to rid people of intermittent fevers quickly, without purging. (From it, many long decades later, quinine was eventually derived.) By the later 1650s, wealthy patients were demanding this very expens-ive medicine.10
Because of the intense pursuit of a healing knowledge of plants, animals, and minerals, by the 1530s, at places like Pisa, Padua, and Montpellier, medical professors were eager to show students examples of the simples used in their medicines, a knowledge that doctors had previously been expected to learn on their own. Padua and Pisa established botanical gardens in the mid-1540s, and the university of Bologna laid down a major botanical garden about 1567. Other medical faculties throughout Europe followed suit. These gardens quickly became places for the cultivation of beauti-ful and exotic, as well, as useful, plants, being true botanical gard-ens, not just physic gardens. The master gardeners of Europe developed techniques for wintering over non-native and sensitive plants from around the world. By the later sixteenth century, every university that seriously pretended to an excellent reputation for medical teaching had established a botanical garden, while many physicians, apothecaries, and aristocratic scholars had their own private gardens. By the mid-sixteenth century, too, the practice of pressing and drying plants on paper for the purposes of identifi-cation (the making of herbaria) - a practice popularized if not invented by Luca Ghini, the first professor of simples at Bologna and first director of the botanical garden at Pisa, in the 1530s and 1540s - made botanical study something that could be done all year long.11
At about the same time, some groups of physicians began to compose lists of the simple and compound medicines that they con-sidered useful, and with the help of municipal governments, to limit the dispensing of apothecaries to the ingredients given in these pharmacopoeias. Institutional struggles within the medical


Physicians and natural history


community made the physicians keen to retain their superiority over other practitioners. Physicians generally argued that by virtue of their university education they had the ability and right to prac-tise any branch of medicine, and that surgeons and apothecaries ought to be supervised by them. In many printed works, from little pamphlets to large books, physicians stated that the public was being abused by drug sellers, whether these be uneducated empirics or apothecaries, so that the public good would best be served by making all practitioners subject to the oversight of the physicians. But as asserted by one very eminent learned physician, Jean Fernel (c. 1497-1558), this imperial view made it necessary for the physician to be better educated in medicinal simples than even the apothecaries: ‘The knowledge, collection, choice, culling, preservation preparation, correction, and task of mixing of simples all pertain to pharmacists; yet it is especially necessary for the physician to be expert and skilled in these things. If, in fact, he wishes to maintain and safeguard his dignity and authority among the servants of the art, he should teach them these things.’12 Increasingly, views like Fernel’s had legal power, for many munici-palities began to enact laws restricting the local apothecaries to the official pharmacopoeias. The local physicians determined the proper and true simple and compound medicines, limited the apothecaries to dealing in those medicináis alone, and made per-iodic inspections of the shops to make sure that the ingredients were fresh and proper and that only the medicines listed in the pharmacopoeias were being dispensed. The first official dispensa-tories were composed in Venice (1496) and Florence (1498), with the first published municipal pharmacopoeia appearing in Nurem-berg (1535), followed by ones in Basel (1555), Mantua (1559), Antwerp (1561), Augsburg (1564), Cologne (1565), and Bergamo (1580). London got its first official pharmacopoeia in 1618, and Amsterdam in 1643. While the physicians who wrote such pharma-copoeias staked legal claims of professional authority to their supreme knowledge of medicines, they also reinforced the pres-sures on other physicians to study simples diligently.
Because of both their classical education and their daily con-cerns, then, physicians took the lead among those who worked to identify accurately the simples used in medicines, especially the botanicals. Consequently, it is no surprise that the greatest six-teenth-century herbalists were physicians: Otto Brunfels (c. 1489- 1534), Hieronymus Bock (1498-1554), Leonhard Fuchs (1501-66), Pietro Andrea Mattioli (1501-77), Guillaume Rondelet (1507-66), Francisco Hernandez (1514-78), Rembert Dodoens (1516-85), Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522-1605), Andrea Cesalpino (1525-1603), Carolus Clusius (1526-1609), Matthias de l’Obel (1538-1616), and Kaspar Bauhin (1550-1624).


9$ Harold J. Cook


Figure 6.1 Depiction of purple violet, from Leonhard Fuchs, De historia stirpium (‘On the History of Plants’) (1542). The draughtsmen for the illustrations were Heinricus Fiillmaurer and Albertus Meyer, and the engraver Vitus Rodolphus Specklin. Fuchs’s text drew mainly from ancient authors, although it is not as thorough as others (such as Otto Brunfels’s Herbarum vivae eicones (‘Living Images of Plants’) of 1530); but the beautiful woodcuts of 500 plants, each occupying an entire folio page, and drawn in outline with roots, branches, leaves, and often flower and fruit depicted, are remarkable.



Intellectual commitments
But the intellectual world of the early modern physicians saw developments that made them deeply interested in natural history not only because of the importance of simples to their ars. Natural history became central to the preoccupations of physicians con-cerned to establish a firm foundation for their scientia as well.
For many reasons the later fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries saw multiple attacks on established university philos-ophy. These attacks came from both inside and outside the acad-emy. The recovery of a host of new ancient texts made the natural philosophical views of many kinds of non-Aristotelians seem plaus-ible, so that Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism, Epicureanism, Sto-icism, and many other philosophical schools developed powerful supporters, while Aristotelians themselves came in an ever greater number of varieties. The bloody religious warfare and search for heresy consequent upon the Reformation and Counter-


>

Physicians and natural history 99


Reformation also gave some people pause about how firmly one could or ought to defend a particular view, helping to spread an interest in philosophical scepticism and fideism. And many modern thinkers elaborated their own views of nature and developed adher-ents: Paracelsus (c. 1493—1541), Petrus Ramus (1515-72), Francis Bacon (1561-1626), Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), René Descartes (1596-1650), and many others. Most of the principles by which nature had been thought to operate consequently came under attack by one school or another: matter-form theory, the four elements, the four qualities, the temperaments and humours, even the three principles of the Paracelsians, to mention only a few.
If certainty in knowledge no longer stemmed from the principles of nature, many argued, one could shift ground and begin with a knowledge of the experience of nature j the elements of which con-stituted ‘facts’. The sense of a fact as something that had ‘really occurred . . . hence a particular truth known by actual observation or authentic testimony, as opposed to what is merely inferred’, was new to the seventeenth century. (The previous meaning of the word, still the most common meaning in the sixteenth and seven-teenth centuries, pointed to a deed, since the Latin factum, from which the French took fait and English also took ‘feat’ as well as fact, meant a thing done.) To ascertain the real occurrences of nature - the facts - was, however, no easy task, and meant relying on the testimony of the fragile and misleading five senses, making this kind of knowledge of nature more probabilistic than the cer-tain knowledge derived from authentic principles.13 Nevertheless, Sir Francis Bacon (1561-1626) became famous in later generations for making trials of experience, or ‘experiments’, into one of the foundation-stones of his natural philosophy. A century later, Dr Hans Sloane (1660-1753), President of the Royal Society and of the Royal College of Physicians, wrote that ‘matters of fact’ were the very essentials of natural knowledge, and far more certain than other means of knowledge: ‘the Knowledge of Natural-History, being Observations of Matters of Fact, is more certain than most Others, and in my slender Opinion, less subject to Mistakes than Reasonings, Hypotheses, and Deductions are . . . These are things we are sure of, so far as our Senses are not fallible; and which, in probability, have been ever since the Creation, and will remain to the End of the World, in the same Condition we now find them’.14 Since the Latin term historia, meaning a ‘narrative, account, tale, story’,15 derived from the Greek toiopia, meaning ‘a learning by enquiry’, or ‘the knowledge or information so acqui-red’ (or more generally ‘an account of one’s inquiries, a narrative, a history’),16 natural history came to mean an account of nature based upon information acquired by enquiry, especially through


ioo Harold J. Cook


observation (since sight was held to be the least fallible of the senses). By Sloane’s time, the units of that enquiry constituted the ‘facts’.
Physicians were among those who fought for these changes in epistemology, holding up as an example the ancient physician Hip-pocrates (c.460-370 BCE). Hippocrates, it was thought, had pur-sued close and detailed investigations into nature without hypo-thesizing. Upon these foundation stones learned medicine and speculative natural philosophy had been built. If one needed a reform of medical and natural philosophical knowledge, then one ought to start over by following the example of Hippocrates, and observe closely. This view of Hippocrates went back to the early sixteenth century, to Paracelsus and to the revivers of Hippocra- tism in the medical faculty of Paris and elsewhere. Hippocrates the original, unprejudiced investigator and recorder of nature, rather than Galen the theoretician, gradually became the best ancient physician for students to imitate.17 Physicians therefore took their place among the earliest university-educated men to develop a deep appreciation for natural history as the rock upon which natural knowledge in general could be built. Consequently, their commitment to natural history went well beyond its practical uses to medical practice. Many developed a deep and abiding com-mitment to natural history as the one and only true path to a knowledge of nature. For instance, the English physician Martin Lister (1639-1712) had no particular medical ends in his investi-gations of English spiders (Figure 6.2), while the Dutch Jan Swam-merdam, who received a superb medical education in Amsterdam and Leiden, managed to devote himself full time to natural history rather than having to practise, by continuing to live in his father’s house.18 They, and others like them, had imbibed a commitment to natural history as the best way of knowing.
But by the later sixteenth century, when physicians took up the study of natural history, they brought two investigative techniques along with a search for experiences and observations: they made anatomy and chemistry integral parts of their project. As virtually all surveys of the ‘scientific revolution’ acknowledge, a knowledge of human anatomy moved from a philological concern to know the ancient anatomical texts accurately, to an awareness that Galen and others had sometimes been wrong about the details, to a quick advancement into a very complex view of the structure of the body. Andreas Vesalius (1514-64), a professor of anatomy and surgery at Padua, has become the most famous, but is by no means the only important anatomical investigator of the sixteenth century. By the seventeenth century the notion that a firm grasp of the details of the physical structure of a creature would help to explain it pervaded medical culture. Physicians took to dissecting just about


Physicians and natural history ioi




Figure 6.2 English spiders (‘De Araneis Octonoculis’), from Martin Lister, Hist&riae animalium Angliae (1678). Note that some of the forms of the webs are depicted,.as well as the spiders. The book was composed while Lister was practising in York; after his move to London in 1683 he became an active participant in the Royal Society. He is notable for his work on molluscs as well as ‘insects’ and medicine. Lister’s wife and daughter made many of the drawings he used in his books.

any animal or plant if given the opportunity, in order to analyse them. By the seventeenth century, too, increasing numbers of physicians had taken up chemistry as an analytical tool as well as a means for inventing new remedies. While Paracelsus and others had combined a chemical outlook with other challenges to medical orthodoxy, so that sixteenth-century physicians tended to think of iatrochemists as dangerous quacks, chemistry proved so useful a tool that physicians gradually adopted it - although in doing so


102 Harold J. Cook


they tended to adopt other sorts of explanations for chemical trans-formations than Paracelsian ones.
By the middle of the seventeenth century, then, physicians had not only become enthusiastic natural historians, they had also com-bined their investigations into creatures and natural objects with anatomical and chemical analyses. The University of Leiden, for instance, became famous for its medical teaching. There the pro-fessors took students into clinics to show them cases of disease; taught them methods of chemical analysis; dissected energetically both privately and publicly; and made sure that the botanical garden, herbaria, cabinets of curiosities, and collections of pre-served specimens got heavy use. ‘I was much pleasd with a sight of their Anatomy Schole, Theater & Repository’, wrote the English visitor to Leiden, John Evelyn (1620-1706). It ‘is very well fur-nish’d with Naturall curiosities; especially with all sorts of Skeletons, from the Whale & Eliphant, to the Fly, and the Spider’. The garden, too, ‘was indeed well stor’d with exotic Plants’.19 Lei-den’s curriculum had in large part been modelled on Padua’s, where anatomy, botany, and the clinic (if not chemistry) had become central to medical teaching in the mid-i56os.20 The medi-cal faculties of Montpellier and Basel, too, combined chemical, anatomical, and botanical teaching.21
The combination of natural history with chemistry and anatomy flourished not only in medical schools, but in the new institutions established in the seventeenth century to investigate nature. The chemical physician Guy de la Brosse (c. 1586-1641) became the first instructor at the Jardin du Roi in Paris (later known as the Jardin des Plantes) under the patronage of Cardinal Richelieu: he was both an excellent botanist and excellent (Paracelsian) chemist, teaching both at the Jardin. Richelieu also supported the work of the chemist and physician Théophraste Renaudot and his Bureau d’Adresse, which was in part a forum for public discussions of natural knowledge. Thirty years later, during the 1660s and after, at the Paris Academy of Sciences the botany programme involved not only growing, collecting and illustrating exotic and useful plants, it also involved analysing them anatomically and chemi-cally.22 In London, too, the Royal Society for the Advancement of Natural Knowledge (as its charter styled it) undertook anatom-ical and chemical studies as part of its ordinary investigations into nature; the Philosophical Transactions, which regularly reported on work of interest to the Society, published many such accounts. Many years ago Raymond Phineas Stearns attempted to break down the papers and experiments done at the Royal Society during its first century of existence; if we take his figures, about 43 per cent of the ‘experiments’ concerned ‘medical sciences’, natural


Physicians and natural history


103




Figure 6.3 Mosquito larvae, from Jan Swammerdam, Hisioria insectorum generalis (1669). Swammerdam’s great ingenuity in developing instruments and techniques to study the smallest details of natural things, especially their anatomy, is truly remarkable. He not only worked with powerful single-Jens microscopes, but developed tiny tools in order to explore the anatomy of insects, finding (for instance) the wings of a butterfly in the body of a caterpillar. He worked alone and with other Amsterdam physicians.

history, and chemistry, while about 44 per cent of the papers read spoke to natural history or ‘medical science’.23
Because natural history had become the keystone of both the physicians’ ars and their scientia by the mid-seventeenth century, physicians made up a large proportion of the members of these early modern ‘scientific’ societies. For instance, Charles Gillispie noted long ago that in the early Royal Society of London, physicians were ‘both quantitatively and qualitatively . . . instrumental in implementing the “new philosophy’” (although his ideas about ‘science’ as mainly physical science caused him to treat their interest as an avocation unrelated to medicine). He noted, too, that in 1664 physicians occupied five of the seven teaching posts at Gresham College (where the Royal Society met), while by his count fourteen of the thirty-seven members of the Royal Society in 1662 (or 38 per cent) were physicians.24 Marie Boas Hall pointed out that it was ‘clever young physicians who, about 1645, began those meetings at Gresham College which were the seed from which the Royal Society was to grow’, while A. Rupert Hall noticed that ‘at least a fifth’ of the members of the Royal Society to 1687 ‘had some sort of connection with medicine’.25 More recent analyses of the member-ship of the Royal Society by Michael Hunter have reiterated the numerical and intellectual importance of physicians to the new philosophy in England. One of the nine classes of members into which Hunter divides the Fellows is that of ‘medical practitioners’, which includes court and university physicians but excludes


104 Harold J. Cook


Figure 6.4 Heading of the chapter on the octopus, from Guillaume Rondelet, Libri de piscibus marinis (1554-5). Rondelet (1507-66) held a regius professorship in medicine at Montpellier from 1545 until his death. An intensely active anatomist, and an author of several medical works, his fame in subsequent generations has been mainly for his massive
t work on fish, which
remained authoritative for over 100 years. His influence in inspiring his students and other scholars to take up natural history investigations makes him one of the most important naturalists of the sixteenth century.



apothecaries and people with MDs who did not practise medicine (like Sir Christopher Wren). Of all the elected fellows from 1660 to 1700, 16 per cent fall into this category (one of the two largest groups); an unusually high 81 per cent of them showed at least some active participation in the affairs of the Society (the greatest activity of any group). They and the scholars and writers together made up between one-third and one-half of the Society’s active core.26
Physicians composed such a quantitatively and qualitatively sig-nificant core of promoters of the ‘new philosophy’ for two reasons: natural historical investigations had become central to both their ars and scientia, causing many physicians to be so deeply taken by these studies that they promoted natural history not only vocationally but as an avocation, too; and natural historical investi-gations had become part of the core studies of nature during the period. It is to do no injustice to the importance of mathematical reasoning, or Cartesianism, Newtonianism, and other natural philosophies, to say that for contemporaries, other kinds of investi-gations of nature were at least as important as they. Medicine and natural history constituted, in fact, the ‘big science’ of the early modern period, soaking up enormous sums of money and energy contributed by countless people.27 The physicians, who were among those leading the pursuit of a knowledge of natural things and events, came to find more intellectual stability in ‘matters of fact’ than in controverted principles of nature. As a result, phys-icians were not only crucial to the promotion of natural historical


Physicians and natural history 105


studies as both an activity and an intellectual outlook, they also took an active role in the development of the new philosophy.
Further reading
Arber, Agnes, Herbals, their Origins and Evolution: A Chapter in the History of Botany, 1470-1670, 2nd edn., (Cambridge, 1938).
Cook, Harold J., ‘Physick and natural history in the seventeenth century’, in Roger Ariew and Peter Barker (eds.), Revolution and Continuity: Essays in the History of Philosophy of Early Modem Science (Washington, DC, 1991), pp. 63-80.
‘The new philosophy in the Low Countries’, in Roy Porter and Mikulas Teich (eds.), The Scientific Revolution in National Context (Cambridge,
' 1992), pp. 115-49.
Foust, Clifford M., Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug (Princeton, 1992). French, R. K. and Wear, Andrew (eds.), Medical Revolution in the Seven-
teenth Century (Cambridge, 1989), esp. ch. 6, 9, and 10.
Lindberg, David and Westman, Robert (eds.), Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge, 1990), esp. ch. 7, 8, and 10.
Porter, Roy, Health for Sale: Quackery in England 7650-7850 (Manchester,
1989)-
Reeds, Karen Meier, Botany in Medieval and Renaissance Universities (New York, 1991).
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang, Tastes of Paradise: A Social History of Spices, Stimulants, and Intoxicants, trans. David Jacobson (New York, 1992).
Wear, Andrew, French, R. K., and Lonie, I. M. (eds.), The Medical Renaissance of the Sixteenth Century (Cambridge, 1985).
Webster, Charles, The Great Instauration: Science, Medicine and Reform 1626-1660 (New York, 1975).
Webster, Charles (ed.), Health, Medicine and Mortality in the Sixteenth Century (Cambridge, 1979), esp. chs. 9 and 10.


ADRIAN JOHNS

7 Natural history as print culture

With the invention of the printing press in the mid-fifteenth cen-tury, the making, distribution and use of printed materials soon became a key part of natural history. As well as transporting and
* . collecting natural objects themselves, practitioners attempted to
make and transport printed records of them. Some of the resulting artefacts have remained at the centre of historians’ attention ever since. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the books produced by such figures as Gesner, Aldrovandi, Ray and Buffon have come to constitute the historical identity of natural history.
We must, then, attempt to understand these artefacts. We need to know how and why they were made, how they reached their audiences, and how they were put to use. These are not straightfor-ward questions, and answering them may mean reaching some rather unexpected conclusions. In particular, secure in our own experience of print as providing for reliable communication to large and dispersed audiences, we all too readily consider its his-tory in terms of fixity and quantity. Printing was unique, we may say, because it caused a vast increase in the numbers of books available, and enabled the stabilization of reliable texts in multiple copies; other consequences then flowed from these. Many his-torians have indeed predicated their accounts of printing on these elements, and their importance is beyond doubt.1 Yet a close look at an activity like natural history soon shows that too easy an acceptance of quantity and fixity as foundational can in other respects be rather less satisfying. Above all, it means that those elements themselves remain beyond analysis, since they are regarded as definitive of printing itself. Because of this, such an approach tends to underplay the complexity of the social mechan-isms through which early printed books could be not only made, but warranted by their makers as reliable. Nor can it easily com-prehend the different meanings accorded them by different audi-ences. Yet these complications loomed large in the lives of natural historians, and it seems perverse to dismiss them as peripheral. Recently, then, historians have rediscovered these problems, by restoring attention to the work involved in making and reading printed materials. Far from the meaning of a book being fixed by

106



Natural history as print culture 107


the printing press, they reveal it as something arrived at construc-tively, by different communities pursuing interpretative conven-tions specific to their time and place. Their counter-intuitive con-clusion is that quantity and fixity are far from self-evident or necessary concomitants of the printing press.
Early printed books existed in, and were constituted by, various complex and dynamic regimes of practice. To understand them - and understanding them is essential to understanding the cultures of natural history - now means comprehending in a single narrative a series of connected worlds: of book traders and readers, of cre-ative collectives and individual authors. How can this be done? One approach has been to look, not at the sheer numbers of copies made and distributed, but at the fate of a single book through its appropriation by different communities. Roger Chartier calls this the ‘object study’.2 Such a strategy allows for a finer appreciation of the subtleties involved at every stage. A related approach will be followed in this chapter. It will construct an object study, of a sort; but it will do so by making use of a mode of communication employed in the early modern era itself.
Seventeenth-century England knew a literary genre, minor at the time and since forgotten altogether, which, for want of a better name, we may call ‘sighs literature’. A work conforming to its con-ventions would typically be biographical, or more specifically auto-biographical, in nature. It would be a designedly moral, justificat-ory, legitimizing autobiography, designed to vindicate its writer from some terrible slur, or to make à moral example of his or her life. To that end, at every point in that life when a major event had occurred, it would break off into an italicized digression called a ‘sigh’. These ‘sighs’ allowed the writer to interrupt the narrative as if by divine fiat, in order to articulate its full moral implications. Scripture provided ample resources for such cris de c.ur. The sighs of troubled cavalier Richard Atkyns (1615—77), to name one such seventeenth-century writer, were steeped in the language of Job and the lamentations of Jeremiah. The result, then, was a bifur-cated narrative, marrying the ideal to the real, the general to the particular, and the providential to the contingent. It was a peculiar way of writing, but it had its uses - even though Atkyns himself died in debtors’ prison, signally unvindicated.
Without wishing to advocate its revival to any wider extent, this chapter appropriates the most prominent features of ‘sighs litera-ture’. It does so in order effectively to discuss the making, distri-bution, structure and use of printed books in early modern natural history. Sighs literature offers a peculiarly useful structure for such a discussion. For one thing, it jolts us sharply out of our own, twentieth-century, experience of print - the experience which invests fixity and quantity with all the authority of self-evidence.


108 Adrian Johns
It does so, moreover, by allowing us to present a credible account of. how printed books might act in natural historical communities, directly alongside a critical analysis of that very account. Were the historical impact of print really as simple as we often assume, the following narrative could proceed uninterrupted. The aim in show-ing that it cannot - that it must be interrupted at every stage by ‘sighs’ - is to encourage us to question that implicit faith, and to articulate the hidden historical foundations both of print culture and of the enterprise of natural history. In the story which follows, then, it may be best to bear in mind one final counter-intuitive point: for once, the sighs might just be everything.3

The Vindication of the Reverend and Learned ' Doctor Peter Heylyn his Cosmographie, with
certain SIGHS at the end of every CHAPTER
The history I have in mind is not that of a person; it is the history of a book. The work I am going to trace is the Microcosmus, latterly the Cosmographie, of Peter Heylyn (1599-1662). This was one of the most frequently reprinted works of its type in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, and its history is unusually revealing (Table 7.1).
Peter Heylyn was a major religious polemicist, scholar and his-torian of his time. As his son-in-law affirmed, he was no ‘ordinary common Clergy-man’, but a favoured agent of the ecclesiastical and political authorities, ‘singularly well acquainted . . . with the principal motions and grand Importances in his time both of Church and State’. à staunch supporter of William Laud, the latest Archbishop of Canterbury to b. beheaded, Heylyn incurred par-ticular odium among those he called ‘the rabble’ for his vigorous defences of high-church priestcraft. For all that his contemporary reputation was that of a Laudian militant, his Cosmographie left Heylyn’s other works far behind when it came to the numbers of editions printed and the longevity of its influence.
The enterprise of cosmography is no longer pursued as avidly as it was in Heylyn’s day. Of what, then, did it consist? The short answer is that it consisted of all knowledge about the world. As such, cosmography was essentially universal: it would perhaps be easier to list those branches of knowledge which it did not include. Heylyn himself described the field as providing a ‘universal com-prehension of Natural and Civil Story’, by combining three main approaches. From 'Natural History or Géographie', it treated ‘Regions themselves, together with their Sites, and several Com-modities’; from civil history, it discussed ‘Habitations, Govern-ments, and Manners’; and from ‘the Mathematicks', it encompassed ‘the Climates and Configurations of the Heavens’. It was also as


Natural history as print culture 109


Table 7.1. Peter Heylyn, Microcosmus and Cosmographie, 7627-7703; Edmund Bohun/John Augustine Bernard, Geographical Dictionary, 1688-1710

1621
 Microcosmus, or a little description of the Great World
 Oxford: J. Lichfield and J. Short
 4°
 
 
1625
 MlHQOXOOpOO . . .
Augmented and revised''
 Oxford: J. Lichfield and W. Turner; sold by
W. Turner and T. Huggins
 4° in
 8s
 
1627
 ... Third edition, revised15
 Oxford: J. L[ichfield] and W. T[urner], for
W. Turner and T. Huggins
 4° in
 8s
 
1629
 ... Fourth edition
 Oxford: W. T[urner] for W. Turner and T. Huggins
 4° in
 8s
 
1631
 ... Fifth edition
 Oxford: W. Turner
 4° in
 8s
 
1631
 ... Another issue1
 Oxford: for W. Turner and R. Allott [London]
 4° in
 8s
 
1633
 ... 6th edition
 Oxford: [W. Turner] for W. Turner and R. Allott
 4° in
 8s
 
1636
 ... 7th edition
 Oxford: W. Turner; sold [by M. Allott,
London]
 ' 40 in
 8s
 
1639
 ... 8th édition"
 Oxford: W. Turner
 4° in
 8s
 
1639
 ... variant1*
 Oxford: W. Turner
 4° in
 8s
 
1652
 Cosmographie
 London: for Henry Seile
 fol.
 
 
1657
 ... 2nd edition
 For Henry Seile
 fol.
 
 
1665
 ... 3rd edition
 For Philipp Chetwind
 fol.
 
 
1666
 ... ‘Third’ edition
 For Anne Seile
 fol.
 
 
1666
 ... Anr. edition
 For Philip Chetwind
 fol.
 
 
1669
 ... Anr. edition
 For Anne Seile; sold by George Sawbridge, Thomas Williams, Henry Broom, Thomas Bassett, Richard Chiswell
 fol.
 
 
1669
 ... Anr. edition
 For Philip Chetwind
 fol.
 
 
1674
 ... Anr. edition
 For Anne Seile and Philip Chetwind
 fol.
 
 
1674
 ... Anr. edition
 For Philip Chetwind and Anne Seile
 fol.
 
 
1677
 ... Anr. edition
 By A.C. for P. Chetwind, and A. Seile; sold by T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswell, T. Sawbridge
 fol.
 
 
1682
 ... Anr. edition
 For P.C., T. Bassenger, B. Tooke, T. Sawbridge
 fol.
 
 
1703
 Cosmography
‘7th’ edition, ‘Improv’d... by Edmund Bohun’e
 For Edw. Brewster, Ric. Chiswell, Benj.
Tooke, Tho. Hodgkin, and Tho. Bennet
 fol.
 
 
1.688
 A Geographical Dictionary
 For Charles Brome
 8°
 
 
1691
 ... 2nd edition
 For Charles Brome
 8°
 
 
1693
 ... 3rd edition
 For Charles Brome
 fol.
 
 
1695
 ... 4th edition
 For Charles Brome
 fol.
 
 
1710
 ... ‘4th’ editionf
 For R. Bonwicke, W. Freeman, T. Goodwin,
 fol.
 
 


J. Walthoe, M. Wotton, [and 5 others]

Notes: “Sometimes lacks table of climes (as do next 7 issues). bSheets vary: corrected in press. cCancel title-page. dMisprinted title page: ‘1939’; Sheets sometimes mixed with those of 7th edition. 'Discontinuous pagination; printed by subscription (Proposals circulated separately). fDiscontinuous pagination.
Sources: A. W. Pollard and G. R. Redgrave (2nd edn., W. A. Jackson, F. S. Ferguson and K. F. Pantzer), A Short-Title Catalogue of Books Printed in England, Scotland and Ireland, and of English Books Printed Abroad, 1415- 1640 (3 vols. London, The Bibliographical Society, 1986-91).
D. Wing, A Short-Title Catalogue of Books Printed in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and British America and of English Books Primed in Other Countries, 1641-1700 (2nd edn. 3 vols. New York, Modern Language Association of America, 1972).
F. J. G. Robinson, G. Averley, D. R. Esslemont, P. J. Wallis, Eighteenth-Century British Books: An Author Union Catalogue (5 vols. Newcastle, University of Newcastle/Folkestone, Dawson, 1981).


no Adrian Johns

Sigh.

omnivorous of sources as it was ambitious of scope. Heylyn thus chose epigraphs for his book to signal that it employed at once the classics, Scripture and natural history: on its frontispiece and title-page were inscribed the testimonials of Virgil, St Paul and Pliny. In fact, Heylyn selected the latter’s Natural History to exemplify the entire enterprise of cosmography.
What, spécifically, was his book for? Heylyn himself made it clear that although he might play ‘the parts of an Historian and Geographer' when writing it, he remained primarily a 'Church-man'. His purpose was to argue for a particular ecclesiastical polity: that of episcopacy. The rule of bishops, he alleged, was the only form of Church governance established by God. In the years immedi-ately preceding the Civil War, a conflict which has been called the last of the Wars of Religion, this was a highly contentious claim. That was why it was both proper and necessary for a churchman like Heylyn to be writing such an exhaustive work. He believed that he could prove his case beyond doubt by grounding it in an authoritative survey of the natural, political and historical knowl-edge of his time. We can summarize the project, in fact, by refer-ence to the imperatives of Heylyn’s most powerful ecclesiastical patron. Laud was championing a notoriously vigorous view of governance which he called ‘Thorough’, and which he hoped would revitalize Charles I’s realm. It would not be inappropriate to see his client’s cosmography as ‘thorough’ natural history.
For the origins of the Cosmographie, though, we must go back to Heylyn’s early experiences at university. He graduated at Oxford in 1617. It was customary for graduands to read a series of lectures, and he chose geography for his subject. The lectures were a great success. Heylyn followed ‘a new Method not observed by others’, and managed to display himself ‘a good Philosopher as well as Geographer’. So impressed was his audience that he was soon offered a Fellowship. He then decided to publish the lectures. Printed and bound, the first copies began to reach their readers on 7 November 1621.4
‘Lord, thou art he that took me out of my Mothers Womb!'
It can be all too easy to assume that the writing and publishing of substantial tomes about the natural world is self-evidently a worthwhile activity. Yet Heylyn went through a remarkably convoluted process in order to establish the legitimacy of his actions. First, the initiative appeared not to have come from Heylyn himself; friends had urged him to publish the lectures. Heylyn then revised them - a process taking two months of hard work - obtained assent from his father for their printing, and had them perused by yet more ‘Learned Men'. Only after receiving their approval did he pass the work on to printer John Lich-field. Why such a complex manoeuvre? The answer had to do both


Natural history as print culture m


with his good name and with the fundamental origins of knowledge. In early modem England, the former was put at risk by too insistent a claim to personal originality, especially when that claim was advanced by the notoriously melancholic and antisocial figure of the university don. A gentleman must appear to shun the braggadocious connotations of authorship. This matters greatly, because Heylyn’s credit as a proposer of true knowledge - and thus the reception accorded his book - depended on his reputation as a gentleman.
But in Heylyn’s post-lapsarian world - a world irremediably tainted by Adam and Eve's expulsion from Eden - a bigger danger loomed. Perhaps it was religious lese-majeste, as well as bad manners, to claim personal originality. So Heylyn himself maintained that knowledge did not come from the individual, but from God. Why did he publish? Because, he-replied, 'The Lord God brought [the knowledge] to me'.
This, the first complication to any simple story which would leap directly from discovery to published work, is thus a fundamental one. The question of authorship is not trivial. Much was invested in Hey- lyn's decision whether to publish, and such reasoning has its own com-plex history.5
Who were the readers of this work? Records are scanty. Yet Heylyn’s friends were able to claim that copies of his book were ‘bought up by Scholars, Gentlemen, and almost every Houshold- er’, and mainly ‘for the pleasantness of its reading’. Before long, they alleged, ‘scarce any Scholars Study’ was without its copy. That there is some truth to this may be indicated by the fact that it (or its successor) appeared in the auction catalogues of many deceased scholars’ libraries later in the century. The repeated reprinting of the book also testifies to its continued value: it was reissued at least eight times by 1639.
We can, however, identify two readers, and readers who stand out in importance: King James I and the then Prince of Wales, Charles. Microcosmus bore a dedication to Charles, and Heylyn pre-sented the first copy to him in person. But unfortunately for Heylyn, the Prince’s evident approval was countered by an explos-ive reaction from his father. Presented with the volume by John Young, Dean of Winchester, the King was seen to ‘peruse’ it curi-ously. This, the second printing of Microcosmus, included for the first time a detailed ‘Table of the Principall things herein con-tained’, and James turned straight to this table. There he read the first entry, which happened to concern the vital courtly subject of heraldry. ‘ARMES’, it said: ‘why in the same Eschocheon those of England give place to France, 490’. Turning to page 490, the King read that the reason for this subordination of honour was simply ‘that France is the larger & more famous kingdome’. He flew into a rage. In the full heat of his ‘Anger and Passion’, James


112
 Adrian Johns
 
2nd Sigh.------
 called for this impudent book to be searched out and suppressed. Heylyn seemed about to fall victim to the court’s power over the world of printing - to what, in our own day, we might call censorship.6
‘But Lord, what dangers and mischiefs is Man subject to! There is but one way to Live, and hundreds of ways to be depriv'd of Life'.
Despite his precautions, Heylyn's good name was now in peril. He had to tread carefully. Fortunately, the content of his book had been constructed to be helpful here. Mario Biagioli's recent studies of Galileo suggest that at court a figure like Heylyn worked to ‘efface' himself as an author, so as to represent the prince as the source of all knowledge, and himself as a conduit channelling celebrations of that fact. Microcosmus could thus scarcely offer to. add anything to Charles's knowledge of, or power over, the world. Both, axiomati- cally, were already perfect. Heylyn was a skilful enough participant in the affairs of the court to appreciate that much. It was thus to Charles as ‘the greatest and most accomplished traveller' of all that Heylyn presented his own ‘little World’. Microcosmus could not augment his knowledge; it could only act as an ‘abreviarle' of knowl-edge he already possessed. But Heylyn's book was now an element in court culture: that was what it was for, and that culture, with its intricate protocols of presentation, perusal and patronage, would now decide what it meant.
James's response reveals something of the attendant perils, and is highly suggestive of the politics of royal reading. For contemporaries attributed his immediate discerning of the offensive passage, not to adroit use of the index, but to ‘the Kings peircing Judgment'. The royal nous had immediately ‘spyed out a fault, which was taken no notice of by others'. His perspicacity thus constituted yet more support for the notion that ‘God always endows Kings his Vice-gerents with that extraordinary gift, (the Spirit of discerning) above other mortals'. The King possessed all the knowledge, all the skill; his was the discerning, discriminating power. This was the inseparable counterpart of Heylyn's representation of the origins of knowledge as divine. If knowledge came from God, then God's representative on Earth was its proprietor.7
Told of this calamity, Heylyn flew into a panic. He risked losing the King’s favour. What to do? Young advised him to go straight to court himself, and appeal to Charles’s patronage; but, unsure whether Charles, too, might not have been offended, Heylyn dithered. Lord Danby eventually supplied the answer. Heylyn was to write a letter of ‘Apology and Explanation’, and transmit it to the King. This letter would explain what Heylyn had really meant to say in the offending passage, and reattribute the
 





Natural history as print culture 113


undeniably offensive wording to another agent. To restore his good name,, then, Heylyn must establish an alternative reading from the literal one. ‘Thus Mr. Heylyn was the interpreter of his own words’.8

‘Lord, what obdurate heart is it that will not be concern'd in putting Soul and Body into the Hands of Strangers, and contrary minded Men!'
Heylyn had to seize back the ‘soul and body' of his words. His tactic of providing an ‘interpretation' was a well-recognized one. Moreover, in Charles's court Heylyn himself was to become a peculiarly valued ‘interpreter' of books. So in 1633-4, it was he w^o was entrusted to ‘collect' scandalous passages from William Prynne's puritan attack on ' stagecraft, Histriomastix, ‘reduce therii into method', and provide Laud with evidence against Prynne for his fateful trial at Star Chamber - a defining moment before the Civil War.
The point is one of the classification and use of books, and thereby impinges on notions of their influence. Opponents of such ‘interpreting' procedures objected that with them in play one could no longer even ‘tell what a libell is'. Laud's lackeys, they claimed, could ‘transubstan-tiate' any books at all into libels. Mercator's Atlas itself was banned at this time, on account of its ‘sundry scandalous and offensive pass-ages'. We thus need to appreciate the active processes of adjudication by which natural history books attained their meanings in sites of recep-tion such as the royal court. Courtiers often read a text piecemeal, for isolated phrases, rather than pursuing an extended argument from beginning to end. Microcosmus was constructed out of, and for, this sort of reading.9
Heylyn’s letter reached James, and succeeded in mitigating his wrath. The ‘interpretation’ it offered therefore bears repetition. ‘The burden under which he suffered’, Heylyn maintained, ‘was rather a mistake than a crime, and that mistake not his own, but the Printers.’ They had printed is instead of was at the crucial point. This was a convincing tactic, since, as Heylyn was able to remind the King, it was ‘most ordinary in them to mistake one word for another’. The printing-house, then, had been the place at which those seditious words had been created, not the scholar’s study.10
‘Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! Yet let them not Tri-umph over me, nor be believed when they speak Scandalously against me; but let the mischief of their own Lips fall upon them'.
Heylyn's strategy is revealing of the practical work which had to be done if a book - especially the sort of elaborate volume characteristic

3rd Sigh.------

4th Sigh.-----


114 Adrian Johns

of natural history - were to be successful. To recover that work, we need to look to the printing house [Figure 7.1] .Its culture can be recon-structed by attending to the testimony of printers themselves - from ‘their own Lips’, as it were.
A printer did not simply reproduce a manuscript slavishly. A substan-tial degree of interpretative autonomy was expected of him. A good compositor must ‘read his Copy with consideration’, manuals advised, ‘so he may get himself into the meaning of the Author’. He must then use typography to render that meaning clearly for ‘the capacity of the Reader’. That is, he must not only interpret the author’s meaning but also anticipate readership. But printers had to work quickly. Rather as a typist does today, they seem to have worked by the syllable, word, or phrase, rather than by mentally registering individual letters. As a result, their errors were often multi-character ones, which could ‘cor-rupt & pervert the sence’. The most common of all were monosyllabic; the worst appeared in the early 1630s, when the King’s Printers them-selves omitted the word ‘not’ from the Seventh Commandment and exhorted Charles’s subjects to commit adultery. Heylyn’s attribution of a monosyllabic error to his printers was, then, believable. But he him-self admitted that ‘if it had been of a higher Crime than of a Monosyl-lable, it had not been pardonable’.
Many houses employed a corrector. But good paper was too expensive to throw away casually, so books would be made up of sheets in differ-ent states of correction. In consequence, no two copies of a given ‘edi-tion’ need be the same: there are no identical copies of the first Shakes-peare folio, for example. Rooted in the practice of printing, this conclusion is problematic for our assumption that printing fixes’ texts. Heylyn’s book(s) provide a good example: there is no definitive text of Microcosmus.11
Heylyn had satisfied the King. Knowing that he could not afford to make a similar mistake again, though, he resolved to remove the passage altogether from future editions. Meanwhile, his repu-tation at court restored, Heylyn went to France for five weeks. While there, he penned an account of his travels. The resulting text could probably have laid James’s fears to rest by itself, such was the virulence of its Francophobia. In the event, it merely caused Heylyn more trouble. Lent to various ‘friends’, more and more copies were written out by hand, until eventually one of the recipients passed his or her manuscript on to a printer. There soon appeared a published version, ‘printed’, Heylyn noted with dismay, ‘by a false Copy, full of gross Errors and insufferable mis-takes’. If he had managed to evade responsibility for one result of the printer’s craft, he could surely not repeat the achievement for another. Heylyn was forced to print his own text as quickly as he


Natural history as print culture 115


.BS.81. sssis ■ s. ; ? ss :S.: sss ; s: ss : sssSiSSS ss iasSi " ; s. ,:.i,
tc-'J/acricm gevondcn oiUt'tntkttJcurj^Q,
'“7----------------

n 'is'**}?-'



Ofe# Si-vZ .rss ?
sg .n: w/ sJlssr/s?.: s -r W/<
Xa&ircsfes.^ss?,- ￡/ SiZ'/iS CS’i^f i-iliZ.' *'"
P'z%r ssftsrZ iWZr 36:vx.fe .:m /. '.s'O.

/. ';’ .S.

Figure 7.1 The printing house. From S. Ampsing, Beschryvinge ende lof der Stad Haerlem in Holland (Haarlem, 1628), facing p. 392. Bodleian Library, classmark Douce A.219.


n6
 Adrian Johns
 
5th Sigh.------
 could, in order to counter this unauthorized version. So it was that his French travel narrative came to be printed with his Cosmographie)2
‘And now, good God! what a golden opportunity have I lost!'
Hoping to re-establish his credentials, Heylyn had instead fallen foul of yet another aspect of printing and bookselling which throws common- sense notions into doubt. Unauthorized printing was by all accounts common. Only in the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with the advent .of comprehensive mechanisms for the location and safeguarding of literary property and originality, and with the arrival of the steam press, could a modem realm of authorship develop. Meanwhile, an unproblematic publication process was the exception, not the rule. To produce a book was an achievement. And (sigh!) it was an immensely hard and complex one. Fixity had to be fought for. Figures like John Ray (1627-1705) and Robert Plot (1640-96) devoted themselves to such labour night and day - it was essential to the development of natural history. Yet it remains invisible to conventional historical treat-ments, which begin by classifying it as incidental. The problem which Heylyn faced here - of ‘piracy', as contemporary writers called it - contravenes all the most basic values of our own print culture. It thereby throws their self-evidence into doubt, and serves to focus our attention on their historical development.
-Thanks to such efforts, Heylyn certainly became a recognized authority. The court thought him qualified to pronounce on matters of quite recondite mathematical and natural knowledge. When, for example, one Captain Nelson appeared, claiming to have solved the longitude - the key problem of the mathematical sciences - Heylyn was chosen to adjudicate. On his verdict, he was told, rested ‘the credibility of the phaenomenon .]3 But this reputation took a fall with the descent into civil war. In January 1640 Parliament summoned him to appear in answer to charges levelled by his old victim, Wil-liam Prynne, now newly released from prison and the darling of the London crowds. Although exonerated by the hearing, Heylyn found that ‘such as took up matters upon trust and hear-say’ now ‘looked on me as a person forfeited, and marked out for ruin’. This was epitomized for him by an enigmatic experience which occurred as he left Westminster after the hearing. As he walked towards White-hall, a mysterious gentleman stepped into his path and forced him into the road. Laughing scornfully at Heylyn, he hissed, ‘Geographic is better than Divinity', and disappeared into the throng. Heylyn never found out his identity. But the moment haunted him for the next decade. What had this man meant?14
 



Natural history as print culture 117


‘Lord, thou hast made mine Enemies rejoyce over me, and laugh me -----6th Sigh.
to scorn!’
What was this mysterious Londoner’s meaning? Heylyn himself was unsure. None the less, his intervention may stand for the fact that printed hooks do not come with certificates of veracity or instructions for use; they are subject to practices which are necessarily beyond their own stipulation. Heylyn could not control what readers in this newly disordered realm made of his Microcosmus. All the more so since the book ran through eight editions, six of them unauthorized. That was probably why the passage which had so offended King James was never actually obliterated, despite Heylyn’s wish. By 1640, the errors of reproduction had multiplied so greatly that even Heylyn himself, seeing what had become of ‘his’ book, ‘could no longer call it mine’. In what sense had printing fixed Heylyn’s text? Or, to/put the question another way, could a copy of it found in a London bookshop be trusted?
Heylyn spent the years of the civil wars wandering, ‘disguis’d bothrin his Name and Habit’, between Cavalier safe-houses, where he hid from Roundhead soldiers in old Jesuit priest-holes. But by the time of Charles’s execution in 1649, the memory of that Lon-doner’s gnomic accusation was so insistent that he resolved to settle down and return to his study of the world. The labour was long and difficult. None the less, eventually his new work did appear.
The result of all this effort was the transfiguration of the little Microcosmus into a massive folio Cosmographie. It was published in 1652, and reissued five years later (Figure 7.2)
This intense reading and writing caused Heylyn serious harm.
‘His Brain was like a Laboratory', recalled his contemporaries,
‘kept hot with study’. His natural constitution being hot and dry,
‘his Brain, heated with immoderate study, burnt up the Christaline humor of his Eyes’. In short, Heylyn went blind.15 The Cosmogra-phie was the last book he himself penned, and he died ten years after its publication.
‘Lord, what variety of troubles are incident to the nature of Man!’ 7th Sigh.-----
The Cosmographie was not only a book presenting natural phenom-ena. The experience of its own creation could also be understood using notions of nature, and in particular of the human frame. Heylyn’s con-temporaries habitually employed such notions to understand the experi-ences of writing - and also of reading - books. That reading and writ-ing could make you blind was not news to them. Physicians had to treat such conditions regularly.
This should give us pause. For it is routine to site the growth of natural history in the context of a republic of letters characterized by certain new literary and typographic entities: the correspondence net-work and the learned journal stand out. We assume that the impact of these objects on readers is readily understandable, since reading seems


ii8 Adrian Johns


Figure 7-2 Peter Heylyn, Cosmographie (London, 1652; second edn., 1657), frontispiece. Cambridge University Library, classmark Adams.3.65.3.



to us a constant, defined as such by the structure of the human body. They therefore seem to constitute a secure foundation for historical understanding. But early modem writers described the body differently. They accounted for the effects of both texts and images in terms of fac-ulty psychology and the physiology of animal spirits, such that they resulted from a complex interaction of imagination, reason and the body. We should take their words seriously, since people made decisions


Natural history as print culture 119


about what, when and how to read on the basis of siich knowledge. Those decisions were the foundation of any natural historical community constituted by print. It matters, then, that reading has a ‘natural his-tory’ of its own.X(>
As Heylyn himself had put it, ‘Books have an immortality above their Authors’. Each impression was ‘to them another being’. His Cosmographie was no exception. Both the artefact itself and its read-ership were being transformed. Microcosmus had been a modest quarto, aimed at a single royal reader. The 1650s Cosmographie had not enjoyed such patronage. Without a dedication, it bore only an address from Heylyn ‘To The Reader’ which stipulated how he was now attempting to delimit readership. ‘The greatness of the bulk, and consequently of the price’, apparently made Heylyn con-fident that ‘none but men of judgement and understanding’ would read his work. None the less, he baulked at including more than the minimum of illustrations. To do otherwise would, he declared, ‘increase the Book both in bulk and price, and consequently make it of less publick use than I did intend’.17
The Cosmographie suffered more changes over the following years, being reissued nine times between 1665 and 1682 - a com-plex history which testifies to intense competition in the ranks of the book trade.18 But the greatest transformation was still to come. In 1686, an impoverished Tory named Edmund Bohun (1645— 1701), shivering in a ‘dark, stinking and inconvenient’ garret, was put to work by equally Tory bookseller Charles Brome to produce for him a new edition. Cosmography was about to enter the empire of Grub Street.
The República Grubstreetana, as Jonathan Swift called it, was no place for an unprotected book. The first injury the Cosmographie suffered was physical dismemberment. Heylyn’s frontispiece, along with significant portions of the book’s content, was hijacked for Bohun’s other project, a little octavo Geographical Dictionary (Figure 7.3). Such a small work was sorely needed, Bohun insisted: ‘it is a great mistake [to think] that all useful Books must be of the largest size, whereas some are the more useful because cheap and small’. Readily portable, it was designed to be useful for travellers. But more realistically, it was also ideal for those whose only expedition was to the nearest coffee-house. There, Bohun claimed, ‘News being one of the most usual Entertain-ments, the knowledge of places is of absolute necessity’. Explaining this in terms of the physiology of reading, Bohun alleged that with-out such knowledge, news impressed only ‘faint and confused Notions on the Minds of the Readers’. But the ‘first and Principal’ use of the book, he concluded, was to act as a ‘General Index’ to all geographical books. Printing had created such a plethora of


120 Adrian Johns


Figure 7.3 Edmund Bohun, A Geographical Dictionary (London, 1688), frontispiece. Cambridge University Library, classmark N. 10.64.





publications that without such a guide it had become ‘above the strength of Human Faculties’ even to know where to look for knowledge.
Not even Bohun was in control now. The bookseller, Brome, issued later versions of the dictionary without his consent, and although he advertised Bohun’s involvement, he in fact employed


Natural history as print culture 121


another writer - one ‘said to be a Jacobite’ - to amend them. His emendations were controversial; readers especially objected to his entry for the River Boyne, in Ireland, which failed to laud William Ill’s victory there. At length the identity of this second writer was revealed. He was John Augustine Bernard - none other than Peter Heylyn’s grandson. A convert to Catholicism, Bernard had been forced on Oxford University by James II as professor of moral philosophy. After the Glorious Revolution he had fled to join James in Ireland, where he wrote propaganda for the Jacobite cause. In late 1690 he had returned to England ‘very poor and bare’, and in this condition had been discovered and set to work.
Seeing Brome’s advertisements, a horrified Bohun attempted to publish his own notices repudiating the work. But no printer would accept them. Bohun predicted he would be ‘proved a Jacobite', and he was right: thanks to the dictionary, he was saddled with a lasting reputation for Jacobitism. This had dramatic effects, moreover, for in 1692 he became licenser of the press - in effect, government censor. A Whig outcry ensued. Bohun was sacked, and the entire licensing system - a regime of press regulation and literary property which had persevered for almost 150 years - came to an end, never to return. The destruction of Bohun had led to the fundamental restructuring of the cultural politics of print.19
‘Lord, 'tis good for me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy Statutes'.
Books were subject to the communities which made and used them, and to their practical conventions - the social and cultural ‘statutes' which governed the world of printing. Problematic cases such as Bohun’s help, us see this, for one of the most important statutes was that, the conventions themselves be invisible. Controversy brought them to light.
Heylyn’s work had now gone through a complex series of different formats, texts, titles and ‘authors'; its last edition, attributed to the dead Bohun, was financed by subscription [Figure 7.4]. In this it is representative of a central aspect of print. For natural historians classi-fied not just natural entities, but bibliographic ones too. They needed to master not just natural objects, but the vastly increased number of titles purporting to provide knowledge of them. Konrad Gesner is the best-known example. At the same time as his pioneering natural history work, Gesner was publishing a ‘universal library', aspiring to list all the printed books then available. Indeed, he pioneered the enterprise of bibliography. Bohun, too, compiled a Universal Historical Biblio- theque which incorporated natural history books. Transmuted into a geographical ‘index', Heylyn's cosmography had now become a synthesis of the two enterprises: a summary both of the order of books, and of that of the world.

8th Sigh.


122


Adrian Johns


Figure 7.4 Peter Ileylyn/ Edmund Bohun,
Cosmography (London, 1703), frontispiece. Cambridge University Library, classmark N.7.38. Note the multiplication of booksellers’ names: from one in 1657 to five in 1703. This represents a change in the social structure of publishing. The figures named here were prominent among London booksellers co-operating in wholesaling alliances called ‘congers’, to share costs and deter piracy. In another development since Heylyn’s early quartos, this edition was produced by subscription.



That world was in transition. The practice of reading was coining to be performed silently and in isolation. New objects facilitated the change: small books, like Brome’s Dictionary, portable by hand and in the pocket. So did indexes - ‘index-learning’ became the subject not of Jacobean awe but of Augustan disdain. Eventually, a revolution in the practice of natural history would become possible, as workers coidd take their cross-referenced handbooks into the field.


Natural history as print culture 123


That a work from the 1620s was appropriated so drastically in the . lògos is striking, especially when its putative reviser disclaimed responsibility, when he himself was the man entrusted by the state with overseeing the book trade, and when his resulting humiliation played such a large role in the end of the entire regime of press regulation. What replaced licensing, eventually, was the new notion of copyright. It is perhaps the greatest irony of Bohun’s story that in the ashes of
his own good name lay the origins of a new authorial dispensation.
Bohun’s subsequent fate also illustrates the new dispensation in natu-ral history. His ambitions frustrated, he emigrated to Carolina. There he became the colony’s foremost natural historian. He spent the follow-ing years, not in the library, but in the field. Confessing that it was ‘the first time I ever did any thing of that kinde’, he travelled the length , and breadth of the region, searching out plants, insects and minerals, and procuring correspondents for the London naturalist James Petiver. In 1701 he was about to set sail for England to deliver his collection to Petiver when a ten-month illness suddenly worsened, and Bohun died. The edition of Heylyn’s Cosmographie on which he had laboured finally appeared two years later, financed by subscription and supported by a ‘conger’ of wholesaling booksellers, joined in a league to combat
piracy. Il was to be the last of all.20
Books are peculiarly mutable objects. Given its different structure, typography, size, price, audience and interpretation, was Bohun’s edition of the Cosmographie the same book as Heylyn’s? In what sense? It should be clear that our answers to such questions must be historical in character. An alternative may be proposed, then, to our common-sense view of print. This alternative will accept the importance of printing for the history of natural history, and it will acknowledge that that importance derives in large part from fixity and increased rates of production. But it will assert that fixity and production - the very credibility, of print, which now seems so obvious - need to be explained. This will allow us to restore to centre-stage the work which Gesner, Ray, Plot and Buffon needed to do to maintain an appearance of constancy and intelligi-bility for their books. In other words, it will see print as something fully and truly historical.
That said, perhaps it is appropriate to end with one last sigh. This sigh comes not from a seventeenth-century writer, though, but from the ultimate source: Scripture. Since Richard Atkyns concluded his own sighs by remarking on the parallels between his sufferings and those of Job, it is apt to finish with the Book of Job itself. There, persecuted as much by disbelief in his proph-ecy as by torture of his body, the prophet is eventually reduced to a state of anguished exasperation. What can he do to make his words ring out Tor ever’? With splendid anachronism, James I’s


124 Adrian Johns


i

translators appropriated this cry, and had Job hit upon their own greatest hope for a machina ex, deo capable of transcending the strife of their world. ‘Oh that my words were now written’, they made Job sigh: ‘Oh that they were printed in a book!’21

Further reading
Blunt, W., The Art of Botanical Illustration, rev. W. T. Steam (London, 1950; 1994 edn.).
Chartier, R., The Cultural Uses of Print in Early Modem France, trans. L. G. Cochrane (Princeton, NJ, 1987).
‘Texts, printings, readings’, in L. Hunt (ed.), The New Cultural History (Berkeley, CA, 1989), pp. 154-75.
The Order of Books: Readers, Authors and Libraries in Europe between the Fourteenth and Eighteenth Ce.iuries, trans. L. G. Cochrane (Cambridge, 1994)-
(ed.) The Culture of Print: Power and the Uses of Print in Early Modem
Europe, trans. L. G. Cochrane (Cambridge, 1989).
Dance, S. P., Classic Natural History Prints, 5 vols. (London, 1990-1). Darnton, R., The Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing History of the
‘Encyclopédie’ 1775-1800 (Cambridge, MA, 1979).
‘History of reading’, in P. Burke (ed.), New Perspectives on Historical
Writing (Cambridge, 1991), pp. 140-67.
Eamon, W., Science and the Secrets of Nature: Books of Secrets in Medieval
and Early Modem Culture (Princeton, NJ, 1994).
Eisenstein, E. L., The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications
and Cultural Transformations in Early Modem Europe, 2 vols.
(Cambridge, 1979). Abridged as The Printing Revolution in Early
Modem Europe (Cambridge, 1983).
Febvre, L. and Martin, H.-J., The Coming of the Book: The Impact of
Printing 1450-1800, trans. D. Gerard (London, 1984).
Fissell, M. E., ‘Readers, texts, and contexts: vernacular medical works in
early modern England’, in R. Porter (ed.), The Popularization of Medi-cine, 1650-1850 (London, 1992), pp. 72-96.
Jardine, L., Erasmus, Man of Letters: The Construction of Charisma in Print
(Princeton, NJ, 1993).
McKenzie, D. F., ‘Printers of the mind: some notes on bibliographical theories and printing-house practices’, Studies in Bibliography, 22 (1969), PP- 1-76.
Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts (London, 1985).


II Virtuosity, improvement and sensibility


i

f



DANIEL ROCHE

8

Natural history in the academies

In seventeenth- and eighteenth-century France, the monarchy established a network of learned societies, starting with Paris, where the Académie Fran.aise was one of the great state foun-dations prior to 1670. Here also, under Louis XIV and his minister Colbert, the Academy of Sciences was established and reorganized between 1666 and 1700, at the same time as the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres was being formed. In the capital, the Crown had at its disposal a number of official institutions which it had founded by harnessing or organizing private assemblies. Each, in its own field, served in an advisory capacity and supplied experts in different areas of learning. The Parisian network was completed by the addition of the Academy of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture, that of Music, and that of Surgery between 1720 and 1830. In the 1770s the Royal Society of Medicine joined the number of royal establishments.
Contrastingly, the provincial academic movement occurred in three principal stages. Before 1700 some ten societies were formed, benefiting from the support of local patrons and from royal protec-tion. Between 1715 and 1760 about twenty new societies appeared, fostered by lettres patentes, and these were followed by a further ten academies after 1760 (Figure 8.1). The movement as a whole, which coincided with the appearance of other, less formally struc-tured societies throughout France, especially after the 1760s, indi-cates the development of relations between the intellectual world and the administrative, royal, and regional governing bodies. In Paris the societies welcomed true professionals, who received pen-sions, but in return often carried out an active role in the service of the Crown, such as in censorship or in royal factories. They gave advice and established desirable prizes. In the provinces these societies formed a meeting place for amateurs recruited from the local social elites, and early on set up competitions and funded savant activities. Through their ceremonies, finally, they came to be integrated in the social and political life of the town.
The encyclopaedic project benefited from the success of the aca-demic movement, which supplied it w7ith a proportion of its Parisian and provincial collaborators.’ The Encyclope'die was

127



128 Daniel Roche


1650-17 IS



1720-1760



1760-1785



Figure 8.i Map of France, showing the sites of academies founded 1650-1715, 1720-60, and 1760-89, respectively. From D. Roche, Le Siècle des lumières en province: Académies et académiciens provinciaux, 1680-1789 (Paris, 1978), 2 vols., vol. II, ‘Cartes’, figs. 1-3. Empty circles denote the locations of academies pre-dating the period in question.


129


Natural history in the academies
i

initially run by Denis Diderot (1713-84) and the great mathema-tician Jean le Rond d’Alembert (1717-83). Diderot was a philoso-phe, renowned for his savant works, his translations from the English, and soon also for his philosophical audacity, as the obser-vations of the inspector of police reveal. Together they conceived and constructed a general systematic inventory of knowledge, as the Tableau préliminaire to their joint work shows. Here the entirety of nature is evoked in words and illustrations to show how it was possible to integrate the sciences and arts within a coherent philosophical system. The great dictionary appeared after more than twenty years of hard work, in spite of censorship and criti-cism, thanks to the support of a section of the royal administration, in particular that of the director of the Librairie, Chrétien- Guillaume de Lamoignon de Malesherbes (1721-94). Provincial amateurs, professional men, physicians, surgeons, and professors did not by any means accept all the daring philosophical and religious statements contained within the Encyclopédie, but they accepted the subject matter, the factual analyses, the inventory, and the technical processes described, which they in turn helped to improve and disseminate.2
In its breadth and in the diversity of its articulations, the Encyclopédie’’s definition of natural history allows us to understand the essential attraction that this branch of science could exercise over the world of provincial amateurs.
The object of Natural History is as extensive as nature; it comprises all the beings which live on the earth, which lift themselves into the air, or which remain in the bosom of the waters, all the beings which cover the surface of the earth, and all those that are hidden within its entrails. Natural history in its widest extent would embrace the entire universe, because the stars, the air and meteors are included within nature; thus one of the greatest philosophers of Antiquity, Pliny, produced a natural history under the title of History of the world, historia mundi. But the more we have acquired knowledge, the more we have been led, and even forced, to divide it into different kinds of sciences. This division is not always exact, because the sciences are not so distinct that they do not have relations with one another; that they do not merge into one another and connect at several points, in both their generalities and their particulars.3
Diderot, to whom this article has been attributed, continued the description of the tree of knowledge whose three principal branches - animals, plants, and minerals - constitute the diverse subjects of a realm in which ‘accurate and complete descriptions’, observation as the basis of comparison, and the effort necessary ‘to see the progress of nature in her productions’, were to reign.
Anatomy, medicine, botany, and agriculture were thus to unite savants of all orders and ‘work together for the happiness of men’.


130 Daniel Roche


Here we can see a range of the concerns which formed a part of the academicians’ patrimony. The link between these concerns was strengthened by the fact that it depended less upon a precise and programmatic definition which operated similarly everywhere, than upon a wider concern to generate order which proved capable of channelling a variety of abilities and different cultural levels into a single programme. Within this programme, ‘history’ was the study of facts taken as true and no longer that of facts taken as false, and thus enabled the amalgamation of a genuine civic utili-tarianism with a concern for the sciences.4 Natural history reveals the concerns which pulled the academic world in different direc-tions: both curiosity and science based upon precise observations and experiments; both the taste for the extraordinary and the con-cern to establish true facts; both the application of Kant’s ‘adven-ture of reason’ (that is, speculation about the origins of living beings) to the real world and the desire to serve the public. The practices of provincial amateurs, and their fundamentally utili-tarian goal, brought closer, as much as they distanced, the rational ideal of a science based on the rejection and articulation of facts, rather than on their accumulation.
An understanding of the social conditions of such concerns underlines the real divisions which could exist between the theor-etical discourses and scientific practices of Parisian academicians, on the one hand, and those of the motley environment of the prov-incial pillars of society, on the other. The former were principally those who, at "the Royal Academy of Sciences, worked to ‘establish science’ and to ‘experience/experiment on the living world’, whilst escaping the pitfalls of animism and reductionism. In the prov-inces, however, the power of the institutions, as well as the very different relationship between practitioners of the exact sciences, geometers, and naturalists, did not encourage the emergence of the life sciences with the same rapidity and visibility?
Natural history and the ‘academic city’
It is hard to fix a precise date for the conversion of the academic city to science, and even more difficult to follow the rapid growth of the multifaceted interest in the sciences of nature, with any rigour. The Parisian example did not serve as a model for all the provincial societies, which were originally founded to celebrate lan-guage and power, on the lines of the Académie Fran.aise. From the first half of the seventeenth century, savant circles in Toulouse (with Fermat), in Clermont (with Pascal), and in Caen (with Huet), had an active and public existence, but their meetings, within which the eighteenth-century academies would perceive a continuous tradition, initially did not follow Parisian programmes.


Natural history in the academies 131


In the case of Caen, D. S. Lux has shown how its Parisian foun-
dation, under royal patronage, put an end to the activities of local
patrons and provoked a grave crisis from which the Caen insti-
tution needed several years to recover.6 It is in Montpellier and
Bordeaux that the first naturalists are to be found, and in both
cases the new establishments were founded under the watchful eye
of Parisian academicians.
In the case of Montpellier, the opportunity for the development of natural history arose as a result of the close ties between the old faculty of medicine and the Court, and from the wish to create a centre of savant and utilitarian culture in the southern provinces which would be strong enough to collaborate with the Royal Acad-emy of Sciences. The Montpellier society thus obtained total equal-ity with the Parisian society, a prerogative that no other society '
would ever attain. However, in the period 1706-40, it was con-fronted by the same problems as those facing the Caen Académie de Physique in its members’ attempt to organize themselves and collaborate within a centralized and hierarchical scientific life.
Physician-naturalists and numerous amateurs engaged in activities which would enable the Montpellier society to be relaunched in the second half of the eighteenth century, but with less Parisian pressure.
By contrast, in Bordeaux, it was the wealth and culture of a group of noble amateurs, dominated by parlementaires, and among whom Montesquieu was to be found from an early stage, which controlled the scientific enterprise, captured Parisian patronage, and ensured the continuity of research. But we should note that the Bordeaux project placed natural and literary history on the same footing. From 1715, in a project which would continually reappear on the agenda, the Bordeaux amateurs located themselves in a dual tradition, that of the great provincial political, civil, and textual histories, exemplified by the Benedictine model, and that of the history of nature. This last was guided by the Aristotelian taste for collection and enquiry, being empirical rather than exper-imental, a genealogy and an investigation of facts simultaneously.
As at Montpellier, the mental horizons of Bordeaux academicians were rather those of the curious observation of nature and of the living world than those of natural philosophy or physics.
In the first phase of academic formations, a debate took place over the status of science and its relation to the humanist and rhe-torical heritage which formed the common environment of the provincial amateurs. At the start of the eighteenth century the provincial model was still dependent upon an older culture of humanism and curiosity. This was fuelled by the teaching of the collèges, Furetière’s ‘human sciences’ (1690), and the Jesuit and Oratorian 'physique''. The provincials were former pupils of the


132 Daniel Roche


collèges, and for them the power of discourse underpinned their whole cultural project; the triumph of Parisian language was thus that of a particular political perspective. Simultaneously, another controversy was taking place, also recognizable in the creation of the Paris Academy of Sciences. It involved a choice between two structuring principles, that of a Baconian utilitarianism which aimed to help man control his environment and society, and that of a larger vision, defended by Claude Perrault, which aimed to involve all talents in the service of experience' and within a general understanding of culture which was associated with the notions of organization and professionalization.
Natural history was situated at the pivot of these two concep-tions, as can be seen from the number of physicians who classed themselves amongst the physicists of the Parisian society (five out of seven academicians),7 and from the numbers in which provincial savant societies recruited members of the faculties or colleges of medicine. Of 3,000 academicians identified over four generations, more than a quarter of the ordinary members (28 per cent) and more than a third of the correspondents and associates belonged to this group.8 A sociological constant underlay the permanence of this scientific concern: two learned societies were never to elect physicians, the Jeux Floraux of Toulouse and the Academy of Montauban. In Paris, as in the provinces, physicians were not always elected as practitioners, but it was nevertheless as such that they occupied a place in the urban fabric,9 and as practitioners that they made theoretical and practical'claims, which were backed up by their social position, in academic debates.
As it progressively escaped the influence of the belles-lettres model, the provincial movement was able to develop an orientation which favoured the pursuit of the sciences. Between 1715 and 1760 the number of academies was increased by the addition of twenty new societies. Their titles indicate the role of the appeal to the sciences: nine included the term belles-lettres, faithful to the old practices of the ‘human sciences’ as defined by the humanities; all the rest placed themselves under the polymathic heading of sci-ences, arts (meaning the technical and fine arts simultaneously), and letters. The absence of savant specialization meant that every-one could study what he liked: and it was this quality that made the provincial situation unique. The reconciliation of the Baconian ideal with the wide ambitions of Perrault allowed all recognized amateurs to be naturalists, observers, and experimenters, rather than speculators. The rule of objects, rather than words, was what the Parisian specialists - physiciens, anatomists, botanists, chem-ists - and the provincial polymaths had in common. A single hope could unite Parisians in their separation and provincials in their unity: the prospect of success for a community that validated


Natural history in the academies 133


individual discoveries and guaranteed their use for the transform-ation and progress of the academic city.10
Here we can doubtless detect the effects of physics teaching within the colleges. Between 1700 and 1760 almost all the Oratoire establishments dispensed mathematical and physical education, as did the Jesuit collèges.11 The elite was educated by means of a humanization of geometry. Collège professors employed a 'méthode riante' in which the phenomena of physics were studied less in terms of a mathematization of the world than through the sight of picturesque experiences, and within the happy disorder of an induction which was not wholly codified. It offered a space for very diverse subjects, as the public exercises and surviving courses reveal: the barometer, colours, the air, natural geography, anatom-ical matters, the elements of botany, and natural observations. At the école de Sorreze, directed by the Benedictines, natural sciences entered the curriculum after 1775 and physics exercises gave way to meteorology and physiology; the programme for natural history courses in 1784 included botany, pharmacology, medicine, agri-culture, and observations on the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Students began to be taken into the countryside on herborizing trips.
The conversion of provincial amateurs to natural history not only presupposed this transformation, but also depended upon it and accelerated it, for there were profound, old, and durable links between the world of the teachers and that of the academies.12 Thus Amiens, Auxerre, Besan.on, Béziers, Brest (which was affiliated to the Academy of Sciences), Chalons-sur-Marne, Cler-mont-Ferrand, Dijon, Lyons, Metz, Nancy, Pau, Rouen, and Tou-louse opted, with variations, for a title which placed them under the banner of the sciences. La Rochelle and Montauban remained faithful to the letters, but none the less opened their doors to the sciences. A number of the first-founded academies imitated them after 1750, and the last to be created, Cherbourg, Arras, Bourg-en- Bresse, Agen, Grenoble, Valence, and Orleans, followed the trend. The academicians, masters of language, still existed in a universe of inventories and taxonomies, but they were already inspired by the organized enquiry which guided both the new norms of experi-ment and the drive for utility. The academic function of natural history should be deciphered and understood within this innov-ative realm lying between the sciences and the arts. Natural his-tory’s theoretical framework was of less importance than its appli-cations and its utility: its relationship with the mastery of the real world.
Growing savant ambitions offered more room for the history of nature. At Dijon, in the context of a literary society dominated by the beaux-esprits of the parliament, the doyen Pouffier proposed a


134 Daniel Roche


vast programme, characteristic of the pre-encyclopaedic spirit, for academic discussions: within this, in effect, physics and medicine addressed every aspect of the knowledge of nature, covering what the university omitted, and they led to a science of mores. Let us examine this provincial manifesto, written in the testamentary and notarial style, some time after October 1725.13

The modernity and utility of natural history
Choices of subject for discussions ... It is thus only in relation to the mores of the soul, and to the other part of man, which is the human body, that useful observations and discussions can be made: with regard to this second part, man cannot have a perfect knowledge of the parts
* and properties of his body unless he should also have one of those very
simple parts of matter which are the principles and the elements which enter into the composition of all mixed bodies and of his own, and unless he should also know the effects and properties of all the natural bodies which surround him and act upon him by virtue of the relation between them and the human body. Physics, being the knowledge of all natural bodies, must be in part the object of these discussions.
Pouffier’s aim is a history (rather than a natural philosophy) which could be useful to the academic city. His physics and medi-cine reallocate the substance of physics to chemistry, that of anat-omy to physiology, that of botany to zoology, that of geology to topography, that of the science of nature to the science of man. The natural history of the provincial academicians cannot be understood if we neglect this reference to its potential for utilitarian synthesis and the opportunities it offered for playing a socially useful role. The inventory of natural and artificial objects under the surveillance of the authorities allowed culture to be reconciled with nature, enabled cultural inequalities to be wiped out, and per-mitted the conquest of a new modernity. This perspective was at once historical and archaeological, accumulative and interpretative, empirical and theoretical, utilitarian and objective.
We can imagine the distance of this project from Parisian specialization and its regulated ‘appeal to experiment’, where ‘pro-gress is no longer an accumulation but a change in the nature of science, which passes from conjecture to the truth, from letter and rule to calculus, from confrontation to experience’,14 and where the knowledge of living things found its place within the permanent framework of the Baconian model. In the provinces natural history was an element in a cumulative whole which was the expression of a sensitivity towards nature. What concerned amateurs more than savants, even if there were genuine savants amongst the former and amateurs amongst the latter, were the requirements of an age whose attention was focused upon the world and itself, and which


Natural history in the academies 135


was concerned with the discovery of the planet in its entirety, but also with the investigation of its proximate environment, both its surface and its depths. Academic modernity included natural his-tory in the list of its activities because it was simultaneously dis-tracting and useful, indicative of the progress of both knowledge and society. Both experience and invention could contribute to it. It was in this way that it was portrayed in academic discourse, as expressed.in the opening speech of M. Lantin, doyen of the parlia-ment, inaugurating the meetings of the academy at Dijon in 1741:
What is there to repel in the sciences? . . . Physics unveils the most hidden secrets of nature, it opens her treasuries to us; nothing is more instructive, more curious, more amusing. Morality teaches us the duties of civil life; can one ignore them without indecency? Medicine frees us from the diseases to which the human condition makes us subject, or at least serves to assuage them; I see nothing more desirable.15
Similarly, again, at Rouen in 1745, M. de Cideville, a friend of Voltaire, justified the utility of the academies:
How many treasures this beautiful province encloses in its bosom or displays at its surface, and which are still unknown; how many important facts in its past remain to be elucidated; how many branches of industry to perfect or to make known, how many processes useful to agriculture, to the rearing of domestic anifnals, to the growth of commerce . . . One day, a majestic edifice will grow from all your useful dissertations on so many subjects which I have only indicated, a complete body of civil, physical and political history of this province........16
We would search in vain for a rigorous definition of natural his-tory, Cideville’s ‘physical history’, and the conglomeration of ‘fac-ulties’ proposed by Pouffier. What we can find bears witness to a faith in progress and on the other hand, as we will see, to a faith in method.
After the mid-century, in Paris as in the provinces, the alliance of science and the authorities did not cease to favour the progress of the disciplines of Nature. In his essay De .’interpretation de la nature (‘On the Interpretation of Nature’), Diderot foresaw the end of the rule of geometers:
We are reaching the moment of a great Revolution in the Sciences. Given the leaning that the wits have towards morality, towards the Letters, towards the history of nature and experimental physics, I almost dare to predict that before a hundred years have passed, it will be impossible to count more than three geometers in Europe. This Science will stop short.17
If the prophecy was not to be fulfilled, at any rate it is evidence of the tension which spanned the savant world at the rise of a taste removed from abstract speculations, and at the new association of


136 Daniel Roche

i------------------------------------------:-------------------------------------------------------------■.--------------------------------------------------
natural history with literature, above and beyond the association of the physical and moral which founded a new anthropology.18 In short, this was the rise of physique particulière, which equated with the sciences naturelles (or natural sciences) mentioned in the Encyclopédie’s table of knowledge. Between physique particulière and a more global re-evaluation of man’s place in nature and in the city was but a short step, which the provincial amateurs took without hesitation.
This tendency developed in the academic world in two forms. The first can be studied through the development of the disciplines composing natural history, whether through internal analysis, through the comparison of important problems and the comparison of questions with discoveries, speculations, successes, and failures; or through,an analysis comparing institution and experience. The second can better be studied from the perspective of the growing demand which can be seen to develop in public manifestations of savant and academic practices.
Firstly, we might note the increase in routes for the diffusion of knowledge which could ensure the wide success of new atti-tudes: literary societies, reading chambers or clubs, and different groups where books, information, and debates could circulate. Among these developments, the royal societies of agriculture merit a special position, for agronomy was a major element of natural history. The agricultural societies, which captured some of the political and intellectual territory of the older societies, were important in diffusing interest in nature.19 Between 1757 and 1763 fifteen societies were established on the Breton model: Tours, Paris, Limoges, Lyons, Orléans, Riom, Rouen, Soissons, Alen.on, Bourges, Auch, La Rochelle, Montauban, Caen, and Valenciennes. Four others completed this network before 1789: Poitiers, Aix, Perpignan, and Moulin. Co-operation or compe-tition yielded alliances or divisions, which affected the same social circles throughout France. Thanks to the network of local administration, such changes filtered down into the geography of planting, appealing to those who shared concerns for a better, more controlled understanding of nature and her kingdoms. To improve cultivation required a better knowledge of soils, of plants and their enemies; the improvement of animal products entailed the study of natural and artificial meadows, and of ways of improving forage, combating epizootics, and multiplying the best species. These societies of notables assembled improvers of all kinds, from the great chemist Lavoisier to the labourer, and encouraged a general faith in the effectiveness of experimental science and the management of the economy. This was the context within which applied natural history could become a means of growth.20


Natural history in the academies 137


In the field of natural history, just as for all areas of science, we need to question the import and sense of academic involvement. We cannot resort to changes in underlying principles as a way to explain how disciplines develop, nor ought we to ignore the fact that, in reality, there was a very slender representation of inno-vators in provincial societies when compared with the situation in Paris. Here efforts could be boosted from experience to experi-mentation, from collection to classification. We must recognize the social pressures which served to define the limits of the creative capacities of the provincial environment and to dictate its role in the popular diffusion of knowledge. This process can be measured in terms of the establishment of instrumentation and through the meaning given to the disciplines of natural history in the privileged mpments of academic life.
From instrumentation to practice
In the Encyclopédie article, Diderot is sensitive to the fact that the savant movement could benefit from specific material conditions. ‘The taste’ for this science is spreading, ‘men of letters make it an object of study or entertainment’. Some observe and perfect the science, doing real work; others admire and collect the objects of their admiration to display them to the ever-growing public gaze. They both gather together
the productions of Nature in these cabinets which increase daily, not only in the capital cities, but in the provinces of all the states of Europe. The great number of these cabinets of ‘Natural History’ manifestly proves . the taste of the public for this science; they can only be formed through painstaking research or through a considerable expenditure, since the price of natural curiosities has currently reached a very high level. Such an expenditure of time and money implies a desire to instruct oneself in ‘Natural History’, or at least to demonstrate one’s taste for that Science which is sustained through example and emulation.21
The academic movement as a whole seems to illustrate Diderot’s comments and the entry of the world of fashion into the sciences.22 In Paris, as in the provinces, rich amateurs, great lords, and weal-thy townsmen collected (with greater or lesser degrees of discrimi-nation and science) the objects and instruments which populated private laboratories; after 1750, able popularizers such as the abbé Nollet, the abbé Pluche, Sigaud de la Fond, and the abbé Rozier published manuals and popular works. Cabinets were rarely specialized and assembled everything, from instruments to speci-mens, from natural to artificial objects. Dezallier d’Argenville and Daubenton offered rich amateurs the necessary principles for the up-to-date arrangement of cabinets.23 The general craze benefited


138 Daniel Roche
.  >-
from the work of Parisian academicians and professor-demon-strators (such as those at the Jardin du Roi), from the diffusion of examples through books and journals, and from the develop-ment of a market, as recorded by Diderot. There were certainly degrees of specialization between the simple cabinet of curiosities and the cabinet of natural history which was, as Lamarck put it, ‘advantageous to the progress of the Sciences’;24 but all attracted the curious just as they engaged savants to experiment on the vari-ety of nature.25
The map of provincial and Parisian cabinets indicates Parisian pre-eminence: over 230 existed in the capital, and a good hundred in the provinces with a clear preponderance in important academic towns: 4 in Besan.on, 5 in Dijon, 9 in Lyons, 20 in Marseilles, 10 in Montpellier, 9 in Rouen. The map of botanic gardens sup-ports this savant geography, which was very clearly shaped by the action of the authorities in protecting the academic movement and thus permitting certain societies to develop a new pedagogy of sci-ence around collections, sites of demonstration, and experimental laboratories. From a very early stage academicians had interested themselves in botanical gardens. Often, particularly in the seven-teenth century, they employed these as a means to realize their dream of escaping from the world, of rebuilding the Athenian garden of Academe. During the eighteenth century the taste for agronomic and medical experiments, herb and fruit gardens, and the requirements of professors of medicine developed this need still further, just like the increased demand for cabinets of natural his-tory and for laboratories. However, the lack of resources meant that it was rare for societies to possess their own garden. Most frequently they made use of private gardens placed at their disposal by members. Amiens, Bordeaux, Clermont, Dijon, Montpellier, Rouen, and Toulouse were better endowed, thanks to donations by associates. The garden was a site of instruction for apothecaries, physicians, and surgeons, but it also supplied provincial amateurs of natural history with a place of relaxation and solitude, a way to link the utilitarian dream with the moral utopia.
Scientific practices no longer depended only upon the use of books - half the societies possessed a library - but also upon the use of instruments and the management of specimens. The collec-tions of the Academy of Dijon, its laboratory where Guyton de Morveau worked, Séguier’s cabinet and garden at N.mes, the Lafaille cabinet at La Rochelle which was left to the Academy, the collections of the Bibliothèque Delphinale, those of the Montpellier Royal Society, those of the Academy of Lyons (which, in 1775, bought the famous Pestalozzi cabinet), the cabinet of the Toulouse Academy of Sciences, and that of the Academy of Marseilles, all illustrate by their composition the diversity of these new interests,


Natural history in the academies 139




and, more particularly, their switch to the domain of the natural sciences. Societies which did not possess one could benefit from access to collections assembled by one of their members. The his-tory of laboratory practices remains to be written, but we know that their space was not reserved for experimental physics or chem-istry. Chemistry was the principal occupant, as one can see at the Paris and Dijon Academies of Sciences, but increasingly, following Nollet’s example, the instrumentalization of the sciences of the living world gained ground in the academic framework.26 In the first years of the Royal Academy of Sciences it is possible to recog-nize an encounter between geometers, the practitioners of pure, mathematical science, and experimenters who practised natural philosophy. The latter, through chemical analysis, botanical obser-vations, vivisection, experiments of all kinds, and publications such as the Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire naturelle des animaux (1671) and Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire des plantes (1676), made the experimental enterprise indispensable to the knowledge of natural objects. That relationship enabled physiology to develop within the laboratory, disengaging itself from the wider medical programme and the hospital context. In the eighteenth century the relation between experimental philosophy and natural history developed into experimentation on the living world, overstepping the epistemological boundaries of the older natural history. Simul-taneously, the living individuality of plant and animal life was recognized.
The victory of the natural sciences was the result of a shift in the activities of the academies. If one analyses the 30,000 papers pre-sented in ordinary meetings, there is a clear increase in representation of the sciences, even if that figure is purely indicative, given the important lacunae of the sources and their heuristic heterogeneity.

Figure 8.2 Experimentation at the Académie Royale des Sciences at the end of the seventeenth century.
Through the window, the academy’s garden can be seen, whilst academicians observe with hand lenses and microscopes by the light of the window. On the table, an anatomical dissection is in progress, and skeletons line the walls. Academicians reading anatomical texts look on. From A. Stroup, A Company of Scientists:
Botany, Patronage and Community at the Seventeenth Century Parisian Royal Academy of Sciences (Berkeley, 1990), plate 3.

*


140 Daniel Roche


This serves to confirm the quantitative analyses undertaken to date on periodicals (Journal des Savants, Mercure de France, Correspondance Littéraire, etc.), registers of publishing privileges and tacit per-missions to publish, which reveal the state of the kingdom’s book trade. 60 per cent of works can be classified under the rubric of sciences and technics. Within this quantity, it is hard to draw precise boundaries between disciplines, especially between theoretical reflections and practical activities, but it is incontestable that the true passion of enlightened provincial academics was for natural history. This boom reflects two factors. The first, indicated by Diderot, relates to the fact that, in contrast with the abstract sciences where
a single man of superior genius can advance with great strides without any outside help because he can draw facts, principles and their conse-quences from within himself, in the sciences of Nature faits can only be acquired through long and difficult observations; the number of facts necessary for this Science surpasses the immense number of the pro-ductions of nature. A single man is thus incapable of such a vast labour.27
The academic space provided the opportunity for that gathering of facts. Secondly, the fundamentally amateur recruitment allowed a plethora of observers to be involved and to contribute to the work of joint elaboration. It is here that the connection between science and utility can be found because, for many provincial academi-cians, it was less a case of systematic and ordered reflection than one of extending their professional activity or their concerns for the management of men, wealth, and spaces to produce a piece of research which might be densely textured, but which would be more useful for all in the short term. This is why physicians and surgeons of provincial cities were to be found among the first rank of naturalists, alongside great amateurs from the robe nobility or Church, or from the urban bourgeoisie in general.
Three main types of enquiry channelled this enthusiasm: in the first place, medicine, which included anatomical descriptions and physiological reflections, and mixed clinical definitions with phar-maceutical propositions. Globally, it made up almost a quarter of the work surveyed, and sometimes far more: 44 per cent at Amiens, 55 per cent at Auxerre, 36 per cent at Lyons, 32 per cent at Montpellier, and 34 per cent at Toulouse. Botanical, zoological, and geological and mineralogical concerns composed the remain-der, in variable proportions. An important interest was also mani-fest in the agronomic concerns which filled more than a quarter of the scientific and technical papers. Such concerns were scattered and fragmented. They depended upon a double preoccupation: on the one hand, an empiricism of curiosity, linked by an obsession with taxonomy and directed by a desire to make the art of healing less conjectural; and, on the other, a descriptive framework which


141


Natural history in the academies
-----,-------------------------------------------i-------------------------------------

collected accounts of local features and whose explicit (but rarely attained) goal was to be the writing of a natural history of the prov-inces. At Bordeaux, where the academy was well supplied with naturalists, one can follow the two sides of this development, which was motivated by the hope of forming a local inventory. Between 1715 and 1720 academicians heard the abbé Olivier, the physicians Cardoze and Douan, and Monsieur de Montesquieu, presenting, in no particular order, papers on ‘the prejudices of medicine’, ‘indigestion’, ‘vomiting’, ‘poisonings’, ‘rabies’, ‘sudden death’, ‘the use of tobacco’, ‘fevers’, ‘drunkenness’, ‘wigs’, ‘dis-eases due to the wet winter and warm spring’, ‘the salivary glands’, ‘hair’, ‘the appendix’, ‘the sheep’s liver’, ‘autumn flowering’, ‘the growth of cress’, and ‘the flower of the grapevine’.28 M. de Navar-re’s speculation in 1717 about the most widespread obstacles to the advance of the sciences and about the means of combating them is understandable. Fifty years later, the link between dissertations remained similarly unclear.
Nevertheless, between 1715 and the Revolution, the route some-times suggested as a means of integrating the concerns of savant naturalists and others was a return to the idea of undertaking the natural and literary history of Guyenne.29 This work, ‘impossible for an individual’, as Navarre, the secretary, noted, was to inspire academicians charged on 17 August 1715 to distribute their tasks: which they did in geographical order. Caupos chose the peculiari-ties of the Médoc; M. de Vezis, those of the Entre-deux-Mers; Donzan, the diseases of Bordeaux; Bitry chose Garonne; Grégoire and Cardoze, the botany of the Bordeaux region; the abbé Sabath- ier selected mines; the abbé Descors the vine; and the abbé Bellet, history. It was the latter who would return to the subject with more constancy, although the project was never to be completed. None the less, it suggests the persistence of a concern which attracted scattered but intense research: research which was only outlined, but which aimed to popularize particular habits and prac-tices and to locate the practitioner within a more rational ideal of knowledge.
Other societies, such as Dijon, Montpellier, or Besancon, could offer numerous examples of this revealing distribution and indicate its variations.30 At Montpellier, seat of the professors of medicine, the entirety of work concerning materia medica ran to less than 20 per cent of physiological or anatomical memoirs. The analysis of clinical cases and surgical procedures carried the day. At Dijon medicine occupied 43 per cent of meetings, 632 memoirs in fifty years; botany inspired 135 papers, zoology around twenty, and geology just a dozen.31 At Besan.on, where the Academy gratefully received the collections of curiosities belonging to the marquis de Mon trichard in 1762, the presence of salt pans constrained


142 Daniel Roche


chemists to occupy themselves with medicine and physicians with chemistry. Here again, the idea of a natural history of the province directed energies towards the topographic geography of the Jura, and to the produce of the forest and vineyard.32
In the general context of a systematizing project, the success of natural history was clearly linked to the vitality effectively originat-ing within the faculties; natural history expressed the perpetuity of the spirit of curiosity which guided and corrected medical scepti-cism, and it was suitable for a world of amateurs lacking training or particular specialization. This interpretation enabled new crazes to be assimilated, and benefited from the publicity of public meet-ings and competitions, although in the latter botany, medicine, and applied natural history occupied less space than the subjects of physics and chemistry. The subjects considered almost always had a utilitarian orientation, and here it was in the provinces, rather than in Paris, that a form of scientific practice was developed from which an improvement in the condition of all was anticipated.33
Above all, interest in the natural sciences expressed itself in terms of a general promotion of science. The natural sciences were particularly favoured for their apparent facility, and in the index to Bachelard’s La Formation de 1’esprit scientifique (Paris, 1965, pp. 25-7) one can find a number of those naturalists who were in fact only false savants, lovers of pointless questions and inven-tories. In the ordinary meetings even more than in the public ones, natural history was represented, theatricalized, far more than it would be in an experimental situation or in reasoned classifi-cation. The popularizing savant could conquer his public by show-ing them objects with a familiar appearance such as plants, sick people, or animals; or by appealing to the vertigo of the marvellous and of the monstrous. Anatomy, zoology, and botany were oppor-tunities to parade monsters and freaks, deformed children and ani-mals, monstrous vegetables, humans, fish, dogs, horses invaded by polyps, headless lambs:34 in fact an irrational seduction. It was less a case of ‘changing the real’ than of discovering and exhibiting what everyone could do.35
The source of the craze for natural history was to be found in a social imaginary where appearance and analogy still reigned. It was further enriched by the promotion of the senses and the entrenchment of the individual within familiar realities. It is in this way that we can understand the significance of botany and the aca-demic taste for herborization, the collection of plants, and gardens. These practices were favoured by an intellectual and social sensi-tivity and a new morality. The provinces readily subscribed to Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s view of this, and the Lettres sur la botanique were read in circles close to the Lyons Academy. ‘The epistemological concern set in motion a vital concern’,36 for botany


Natural history in the academies


M3


participated in the progress made against the excesses of urban civilization and authorized a relationship with nature and with the world that was richer and more sensitive, an unmediated know-ledge whose fervour encompassed the wisdom of the greatest, such as Linnaeus.
Nevertheless, the true science gained. Firstly, because natural-ists had in common a set of principles and practice, a method, a privileged role for experience, an antipathy towards systems, and the organizing framework of classification. It was not enough to keep account of the facts, one must be a philosopher. Thus the request of the Chevalier de Vivens to the Bordeaux academicians:
That which is the cause of our having so few good observers, and which, in consequence, greatly hinders the progress of our knowledge, is the neglect of almost all the matters within our grasp, however worthy they may be of admiration and curiosity. Assiduous spectators, yet indifferent to or distracted from the most marvellous effects of nature, we are only surprised by them in reflection, when we perceive that their cause is still hidden. But before reaching that point, one must be a philosopher and have wasted much time explaining matters perhaps too distant from us, or too rarely observed, for us to be able to judge concerning them.37
This can explain the apparent paradox of the precocious provincial triumph of Linnaeus, whilst at Paris, Buffon ruled over the botan-ists. It was at Montpellier, with Gouan and Gerard, at Lyons, with Devillers, Claret de La Tourette (Rousseau’s correspondent), Gilbert, and Mouton-Fontenille, at Bordeaux with Latapie, at Agen with Saint-Amans, at Toulouse with Picot de La Peyrouse, at Angers, Rouen, Nancy and everywhere within the academic context that the network of convinced Linnaeans was woven. It would end by imposing itself on Paris with the creation of the Soci-été d’émulation, the Société Philomatique, and finally, in 1790, the Société Linnéenne.38
If from the dawn of the enlightened century, therefore, there was a dialogue between the men of science in Paris and those in the provinces, the amateurism of the provincial historians of nature may have been a hindrance, but the conditions of a new philosophy of nature were equally decisive. The change did not take place in a completely linear manner, but rather through relays of curiosities, waves of interest, and the progressive impulse of mar-ginal disciplines; and within the academic structure in both Paris and the provinces one sees taking shape all that hindered and all that was to come with the triumph of experimentation, ‘with the positive revision of the relations admitted by natural history, a revision which was aided, according to subject, by physics, physi-ology, and even, after Lavoisier, by chemistry, but also by anat-omy’:39 the irruption of the problem and the end of the concern


144 Daniel Roche


with the description of objects. The study of this break with natu-ral history requires a change of framework and other tools of inquiry.

Further reading
Brockliss, L. M. B., French Higher Education in the Seventeenth and Eight-eenth Centuries: A Cultural History (Oxford, 1987).
Darnton, R., The Business of' Enlightenment: A Publishing History of the ‘Encyclopédie’, 1775-1800 (Cambridge, MA, 1979).
The Great Cat Massacre and other Episodes in French Cultural History (London, 1984).
Gillispie, C. C., Science and Polity in France at the End of the Old Regime (Princeton, 1980).
Hahn, R., The Anatomy of a Scientific Institution: The Paris Academy of Sciences, 1666-1803 (Berkeley, 1971).
Keohane, N. O., Philosophy and the State in France: The Renaissance to the Enlightenment (Princeton, 1980).
McClellan, J. E., Ill, Science Reorganized: Scientific Societies in the Eight-eenth Century (New York, 1985).
Roche, D., Le Siècle des Lumières en province: Académies et académiciens provinciaux, 1680-1789, 2 vols. (Paris, 1978).
Roger, J., Les Sciences de la vie dans la pensée fran.aise du XVI IF siècle: la génération des animaux de Descaries à l’Encyclopédie (Paris, 1963).
Salomon-Bayet, C., L’Institution de la science et l’expérience du vivant: Méthode et expérience à l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 1663-1793 (Paris, .978). . .. .
Stroup, A., Royal Funding of the Parisian Académie Royale des Sciences during the 1690s (Philadelphia, 1987).
A Company of Scientists: Botany, Patronage and Community at the Seven-teenth Century Parisian Royal Academy of Sciences (Berkeley, 1990).


LISBET KOERNER

9 Carl Linnaeus in his time and place

When visitors arrived in Uppsala, Sweden, to meet the Enlighten-ment’s most famous naturalist, Carl Linnaeus (1707-78), they were surprised to encounter ‘a somewhat aged man, not tall, with dusty shoes and stockings, markedly unshaven and dressed in an old green coat’.1 At the Swedish court, Linnaeus’s charm was con-sidered to be precisely that his entire person remained that of a provincial parson. This slovenly, argumentative little man even admonished the queen herself. And she was the sister of Frederick the Great of Prussia, and a formidable woman who bottled her own stillborn child for her curiosity cabinet. Yet Linnaeus’s surly self-confidence only enhanced the fact that alongside the guenon monkeys, Sami servants, African slaves, and all the other wonders, he himself was part of the royal curiosity collections which he curated.
European visitors, however, were disappointed to meet in Lin-naeus a provincial. Apart from a mongrel Latin, he spoke only his own vernacular south Swedish. He read no modern languages, and lacked both general culture and the ‘new science’. His foreign students especially disliked the way in which, every Sunday, Linnaeus called in a tenant farmer to play the fiddle, and then watched as they danced the reel with his four unmarried daughters (girls kept semi-literate so as not to compromise Gothic housekeep-ing with French fashions).
Still, Linnaeus was considered ‘the greatest Botanist that the world ever did or probably ever will know’.2 He was compared to Solomon, Socrates, Galileo, and Newton. Yet Linnaeus had neither mathematized living nature, nor identified general laws explaining life’s diversity. He was chiefly a floral classifier, and without a single, towering achievement to his name. His great reputation rested instead in the democratizing accessibility of his achievement. For the value of Linnaeus’s classifications lay in their humdrum, everyday usefulness, for casual and serious users alike. In his guides and handbooks, and in the structure of his systems as such, Linnaeus lowered the educational and financial entrance fee to the study of nature.

145



146 Lisbet Koerner


The sexual system of plant classification
In Systema naturae (1735), Linnaeus first presented his global classification of natural productions to the international public. One Dutch friend nicely summarized its significance:
[With Linnaeus’s] Tables we can refer any fish, plant, or mineral, to its genus, and, subsequently, to its species, though none of us had seen it before. I think these Tables so eminently useful, that' every body ought to have them hanging in his study, like maps?
Linnaeus’s Libellus amicorum (‘Booklet of Friends’) (1734-8), the souvenir booklet which he prepared for his 1735-8 travels abroadj similarly planned
all three of nature’s kingdoms depicted on maps or paintings printed under the title Geographia Naturae ?
Linnaeus began his ‘geography of nature’ as early as 1727, as a twenty-year-old student at Lund University, south Sweden. In the following year he transferred to Uppsala University. Both these centres of learning were sleepy little towns, teaching the rudiments of Lutheran orthodoxy to the future parsons and civil servants of the Swedish state, a Spartan war machine now, after the defeats of the Great Northern Wars (1700-18), without purpose.
Linnaeus was largely self-taught. Between 1728 and 1731, how-ever, he worked as a guide in the Uppsala botanic garden, as a tutor in the home of an Uppsala professor of medicine, and as a plant collector to a professor of theology, who in preparing a ‘Bibli-cal Botamca’ also searched Scandinavia’s conifer forests for clues io Sinai’s desert shrubs. Linnaeus’s own first flora, from 1727, enu-merated plants around his childhood home, Stenbrohult parson-age, in Smolandia. Later he inventoried the ‘small and swampy Uppsala [botanic] garden by the Black Creek’,5 complaining that it ‘daily decays, so that there now are hardly two-hundred [species]’.6
Linnaeus wrote three catalogues of plants in the Uppsala garden (each entitled Hortus Uplandicus), and one more in 1731, and it was then that he shifted from the systematics of Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656-1708) to his own ‘methodus propria’ or sexual system of plant classification. In 1728, he had been much taken by a magazine review of Sébastian Vaillant’s (1669-1722) work on plant sexuality. He now made it the focus for his classificatory botany. But Linnaeus also drew on other scholars, retaining, for example, most of Tournefort’s genera. For the general structure of his systematics he relied on the work of the Italian Andrea Cesal- pino (1519-1603), and ultimately on Aristotle.
Linnaeus created one global classificatory tree encompassing all life on earth, and divided into five levels of generality: class, order,


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 147


genus, species, and variety. He privileged the rank of genus, and sub-divided plant genera according to the number, size, place-ment, and shape of stamen and pistils. But he grouped animals by broad and variable characteristics, such as their teeth, loco-motion, type of blood if any, and habitual home (e.g. land or water). Like Cesalpino, Linnaeus thus affirmed his theoretical allegiance to scholastic logic while preserving common-sense groupings. He also bunched most invertebrates together as Vermes, a folk category akin to the English vernacular ‘bugs’.
Linnaeus’s divisions of fauna (a term which he coined, alongside flora) was influential. He was the first to name us Homo sapiens, and to class us as primates. Linnaeus’s central innovation, though, was the self-consciously artificial way in which he devised his floral classification. He even compared it to an alphabetical list.
By 1735 Linnaeus had essentially completed his systematic theory. In his own view, it now only remained to slot nature into his classificatory tree. He estimated that the earth housed about 40,000 plant and animal species, and a few hundred minerals. He thus could, and did, position himself as a final arbiter of all natural productions. His first major applications of his system were Flora Lapponica (1737) and Hortus Cliffortianus (‘Clifford’s Garden’) (1737). Their exoticizing frontispieces nicely parade their Arctic and tropical plentitude. These works drew on Linnaeus’s two for-mative projects outside of a university setting: his 1732 Lapland journey, sponsored by the Societas Regia Literaria et Scientiarum Sueciae (Sweden’s first scientific society, founded in Uppsala in 1710 as the Collegium Curiosorum); and his.work as a curator of the botanic garden of a Dutch banker, George Clifford, during his 1735-8 stay in Holland.
As he extended his systematizing, Linnaeus scoured earlier lit-erature for species citations. But as a point of method, he privi-leged first-hand experience. He made no distinction between her-barium studies and collecting and travelling, however. At times he also cribbed unverified data from secondary sources. Yet, because many Linnaean holotypes (the specimens on which he based those of his species descriptions that are now regarded as foundational) have survived, we can evaluate Linneaus’s observational style in detail. He was a gifted and rigorous examiner of nature.
Linnaeus emphasized that both learned and lay people could co-operate in his mechanized classificatory work. Whilst involving himself in learned correspondence networks, he also reached out to new audiences and collaborators. His botanical handbooks were brief enough to be read with ease, and small enough to carry into the field. He wrote them in a straightforward, unornamented Latin, and encouraged vernacular translations. In their format - they were each divided into twelve chapters and 365 aphorisms -


148 Lisbet Koerner


they were reminiscent of the Lutheran almanac. Linnaeus probably imagined his followers learning an aphorism by heart every day, just as his father’s parishioners rehearsed their daily catechism.
Linnaeus bragged that because the sexual system depended on a few, easily observable features, coloured or engraved images were superfluous. Poor students and the common people could now become proficient botanists, for an expensive library and previous instruction were no longer essential to a botanist’s training. ‘Yes, even for Women themselves’,7 botany was now a possible science. As further encouragement, Linnaeus gave botanic discoverers honorific floral names. He named plants for women, farmers, and artisans, and once even, to the envy of his ‘master’, for a Surinam field slave.
Linnaeus also spelled out botanical practices to aid the novice. Thus Philosophia botanica (1751), his most important botanical guide, ends with a series of one-page instructions, teaching the reader how to set up a herbarium, organize an excursion, plant a garden, and even embark on a voyage of discovery. He added ten full-page diagrammatic line drawings of plant parts, as well as sev-eral indexes.
Philosophia botanica's regime stemmed from Linnaeus’s own practices. As early as 1733, Linnaeus guided fellow students on excursions around Uppsala. In 1739 he combined his natural his-tory lectures to the Swedish House of Nobility with floral ram-blings on Stockholm’s islands. In the 1740s, at Uppsala University, he led day-tours for as many as 300 men and women.
For these hikes Linnaeus regulated reading-lists, departure times, and public ‘demonstrations’. He itemized objects to collect, such as ‘little birds that are shot’, and listed field equipment such as vascula, field microscopes, magnifying glasses, note-papers, butterfly nets, insect-pins, and pocket-knives. He also established labour divisions: ‘Sharp-Shooters’ killed birds, ‘Annotators’ proto- colled results, and ‘Fiscals’ guaranteed ‘the troops’ discipline’.8
Linnaeus repeatedly promised to replace his sexual system with a natural system. This he variously likened to a chain, countries nestling on a map, knots in a fishing-net, and a grove of trees. And he believed it was somehow encrypted in the relation between all seven basic parts of fructification (calyx, corolla, pericarp, pistil, seed, stamen, and receptacle). Another clue, he suspected, was to be found in his hypothesis that modern species, while probably fixed in the present, had hybridized from a small number of Edenic life-forms, each representing one of the present-day orders. Yet his efforts, as he lamented, always remained fragmentary.
However, in Linnaeus’s view, an artificial and a natural classifi-cation were not two distinct schemes between which one was forced to choose. Rather, the one was linked to the other, as a provisional but n?cessary means to a more perfect but remote end.


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 149


Only when his own giant file index of nature was completed, he thought, would the regularities of nature’s diversity reveal them-selves. In the meantime. Linnaeus initiated an atheoretical system- atics, where lay collectors enjoyed the same status as natural philosophers.
Similarly, Linnaeus’s prefaces encapsulated his classifications in an Aristotelian physics, with its four elements of Water, Fire, Earth and Air, and a Christian theology, emphasizing the perfec-tion of God’s material creation. But this framing effort did not intrude on the systematizing endeavour itself.
Binomial nomenclature
In Philosophia botanica (1751), Linnaeus suggested that each life- form should be labelled with a ‘trivial name’, or a two-word refer-ence, denoting its genus and species. Altogether, Linnaeus thus named around 7,700 plants and 4,400 animals. Today Linnaeus’s binomial nomenclature is considered his only lasting contribution to science. The names of plants (1867), animals (1906), bacteria and viruses (1948), and cultivars (1953), are all generated accord-ing to taxonomic codes that start in Linnaeus’s Species plantarum (1753), for flora or Sy sterna naturae (10th edn, 1758) for fauna. Historians have argued, variously, that Linnaeus’s binomials were inspired by scattered precedents in Renaissance herbals, by folk names (such as ‘barn owl’), or by his habit of abbreviating biblio-graphical references.9 My own archival research suggests that alongside such general influences, a specific story lies behind Lin-naeus’s binomials.
Early modern botanists, Linnaeus included, constructed diag-nostic phrase names (a brief species description which simul-taneously functioned as a proper name) by pairing opposed charac-teristics, descending from the general to the specific. These phrase names were up to half a page long. They also varied from author to author. Thus some scholars initiated zoology trees with a four-footed-two-footed division. Others began with a blooded- bloodless split. Such trunk choices in turn determined how living beings were grouped (and named) in the branches of the classifi- catory trees. Thus, when in 1729 Linnaeus was first examined on his knowledge of individual plants by an Uppsala professor, as he later remembered, he ‘answered them all with the names after Tournefort’s method’.10
Diagnostic phrase names also changed over time, even in a single author’s oeuvre. For they were constructed so as to dis-tinguish the bearer of a name from its congeners (members of the same genus). Each time a new species was added to a system, all its congeners needed (in theory at least) new names.
Thus a young scholar might find himself haplessly reclassifying


150 Lisbet Koerner


an entire kingdom. Indeed, when in 1730 Linnaeus set up a bot-anic system of his own, he simply followed the routine procedure of the botanic novice. In 1729 Linnaeus’s best friend (also an Uppsala student) had similarly written a local flora, ‘ordered’, as he put it, ‘after the very simplest and clearest Method’, namely his own.11
At Uppsala University in the 1740s Linnaeus noticed that his students found diagnostic phrase names difficult to use as proper names in their encounters with both unknown flora and older texts. As was common in the period, they generated their own home-made abbreviations. But together Linnaeus and his students also began experimenting with communal, and more practical, ways of referring to individual species. They used, variously, folk names, bibliographic ^references, and the consecutive numbers which species were then commonly assigned in classificatory publications (somewhat as we number colour plates in art books today).
However, since in subsequent editions newly discovered species were listed in their appropriate genera, consecutive number sequences were unstable over time. Linnaeus and his students therefore used a set of numbers (assigned in the 1745 edition of Linnaeus’s Flora Svecica) as stable and independent references. They had invented an arbitrary numerical nomenclature.
Yet around that time (1748-9) Linnaeus and his students also began using what we today know as true binomials. These first appear in printed form in Pan Svecicus (1749), a brief tract on cattle fodder directed against the import of cattle feed: Import-antly, Pan Svecicus was a collaborative work. Linnaeus assigned each student a farm animal (e.g. pig, goat, hen, or cow). Clutching ink-pots, goose feathers, and scrap papers, the students tracked their animal experimenters, noting throughout the day the plants they fed upon. Altogether they listed some 850 plant species under the difficult condition of seeing the specimens disappear down the throats of their test animals at the very moment they needed to identify them.
Linnaeus’s binomials thus emerged out of his students’ work practices, in the context of his economic botany, and as a stop-gap measure to make his students more efficient support staff and col-laborators. Later the binomials spread from Linnaeus’s economic pamphlets to his classificatory tomes. By the 1760s, in an idealist reversal of reality, Linnaeus bragged of the way in which he had suddenly thought of (rather than laboriously worked towards) a true binomial nomenclature.


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 151


Voyages and collections
Linnaeus was a typical Enlightenment improver. To his Scandinav-ian patrons and public, he spoke of his science as serving the sta-te’s economic needs. Also, his voyages and collecting were under-taken in part for economic reasons. As he put it in 1746:
Nature has arranged itself in such a way, that each country produces something especially useful; the task of economics is to collect [plants] from other places and cultivate such things that don’t want to grow [at home] but can grow [there].12
As Linnaeus and his students also formulated their botanic acclim- atizatipn theory, they hoped to ‘fool’, ‘tempt’, ‘teach’, or ‘tame’ ‘Indian’ (i.e. American and Asian) cash crops to grow even on the Arctic tundra. Thus, Linnaeus daringly predicted, Europe could become as rich even as China.
Linnaeus himself passed up offers to explore at the Cape, in Canada, and in Surinam. But he directed and took part in explorations at home, intended to identify indigenous life-forms to substitute for imports. In a series of state-sponsored journeys, he and his students exhaustively researched Sweden’s provinces. In this way his students also trained for their own long-distance travels.
From 1745 on, nineteen of Linnaeus’s students left on voyages of discovery. Their teacher solicited travel funds from the Levant, Greenland, and East India companies, the Bureau of Manufac-tures, the Academy of Sciences, Lund and Uppsala universities, the Estates, the cabinet of ministers, and the court, as well as from individual patrons. He even staged public lotteries.
Linnaeus’s travelling students included Daniel Solander, Joseph Banks’s botanist on Captain Cook’s first circumnavigation of the earth (1768-71); Anders Sparrman, Johann Reinhold Forster and Georg Forster’s botanist on Captain Cook’s second voyage (1772-5); Carl Peter Thunberg, who as a ship’s surgeon in the Dutch East India Company botanized at the Cape, Java, Sri Lanka, and Japan in 1770-9, and is a crucial figure in the history of Japanese medicine; Pehr Ldfling, who, in the employ of the Spanish Crown, explored the natural productions of Spain and Spanish South America in 1751-6; Pehr Forsskal, who participated in a Danish royal expedition through the Ottoman empire and the Arabian peninsula in 1761-3; Pehr Kalm, who explored north-west Russia in 1744-5 and North America’s eastern seaboard in 1748- 51; and Johan Petter Falck, who as part of the Russian Orenburg expedition criss-crossed parts of the Caucasus, Kazan, and West Siberia in 1768-74. Other students of Linnaeus travelled to


152 Lisbet Koerner


Lapland, the Arctic Sea, Surinam, coastal India, China, and in Africa the Atlas, mountains, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and the Cape.
Falck slit his throat, a crazed opium addict, in Kazan. Lofling and Forsskal died of tropical fevers. Other now forgotten Linnaean travellers also died during their travels, or returned insane or mor-tally ill. Still others survived, but lost large parts of their collec-tions (Thunberg), or published their results only tardily (Sparrman), if at all (Solander). Mostly they became country par-sons and provincial professors.
The Linnaeans’ role in the history of the voyage of discovery is still important, and indeed undervalued in the historiography. But their actual achievements did not match their own and their teach-er’s expectations. For Linnaeus had great hopes for his travelling ‘apostles’, as he termed them.
Linnaeus issued these students with ‘memorials’, or order-lists of plants and animals. There he especially admonished them to study local peoples’ knowledges of the natural world and their manufacturing techniques. For Linnaeus believed new natural knowledges could form by way of a cross-cultural mediation between high and folk/tribal knowledges. This syncretic ‘new sci-ence’ he regarded as simultaneously an epistemology and a technol-ogy, that is, as both a way to know, and a material tool.
Linnaeus preferred his students to travel the well-worn Cadiz- Ghuangzhou trade route, instead of visiting ‘wild deserts’ (as he even-handedly designated Pennsylvania and Yemen). For it was there that such prizes as tea-seeds, herbal medicines, and tech-niques of porcelain manufacture might be found; and thus, Lin-naeus held, these voyages’ ultimate aim, namely to abolish the con-ditions that now made them necessary, might be fulfilled.
The Linnaean ideal voyager, then, was an industrial spy in the busy cities of high civilizations, not a lone wanderer in a pristine natural world. Even if Linnaeus faithfully entered into the Systema the animals and plants that his travelling students sent to Uppsala, thus adding to his register of earth’s life, that was not the only or even the main aim of their travels. For example, only at the very end of his 1745 ‘memorial’ for Kalm’s voyage to America does Lin-naeus suggest, in a single offhand line, that next to his studies of Amer-indian economies, Kalm make his own ‘observations on Birds and Fishes, on Snakes and Insects, on Plants and Trees, on Stones and Minerals’.13
Linnaeus carved out for himself a lucrative role as a govern-mental adviser on voyages, collections, and colonial economies. To take a single example, having read in travel descriptions about Chinese fresh-water pearl plantations, Linnaeus, brandishing a few small pearls which he had managed to grow in the tepid stream that runs through Uppsala, persuaded the Swedish cabinet of


Carl Linnaeus in his time and place 153


ministers to fund a project to inoculate Lapland river mussels. In 1762, the Estates (the Swedish parliament) sold Linnaeus’s ‘secret’, as he styled it, to a Gothenburg whaler, and granted the inventor 6,000 silver thalers. The Estates also granted Linnaeus the right to dispose of his university chair, and ratified the king’s recommen-dation to ennoble Linnaeus. Thus Linnaeus bought a country estate, secured his son’s succession, and was dubbed ‘von Linné’.
Actual pearls were never produced. This came as no surprise to Sweden’s most distinguished economic historian, Eli F. Heckscher: ‘naturally, the whole apparatus resulted in nothing.’14 Yet this is only true from the perspective of the present. From Linnaeus’s point of view, his nine small pearls, supposedly demon-strating the possibility of domesticating Lapland’s foamy rapids (now long since dammed f for hydroelectricity) resulted in a ‘national award’, a family lineage, and noble status. In 1762 Lin-naeus became, as he had hoped as early as 1748, ‘the lord of all of Sweden’s clams’.15
Linnaeus cast himself, then, as a political economist and an acclimatization experimenter. He took little interest in the exact sciences, however, or in technological progress (e.g., ferrous metallurgy and hydrodynamics). Nor did he interest himself in such instruments as diving-bells, steam engines, air pumps, tele-scopes or even - though he used them - microscopes. Linnaeus’s work-spaces more recalled a Renaissance studiola or a curiosity cabinet. For he believed that his science reflected nature’s har-mony, which in turn was analogous to the order of his own study. As he put it in 1754, ‘the earth is then nothing else but a museum of the all-wise Creator’s masterpieces, divided into three chambers’.16
From his student days onwards, Linnaeus arranged around him-self a home which was a microcosm of that ‘world museum’. In this emporium of art and organic nature, parrots and squirrels, and even a young orang-utan, played among potted plants, insect specimens, mineral samples, scientific instruments, and herbarium sheets. Some 3,000 plant species grew in the botanic garden in which the house was placed. Over thirty species of songbirds nested in Linnaeus’s chambers (he provided them with huge tangled branches). Botanic prints served as wallpaper, and were covered in turn by portrait engravings of botanists, paper sheets with handwritten botanical annotations or pressed plants, and shells and conches dangling on iron nails.
Next to family portraits and plaster medallions of royalty, Lin-naeus arranged likenesses of his guenon monkeys, his tame raccoon named ‘Sjubb’, and a whale captured off the coast of Norway in 1719. Latin mottoes adorned doorways. And on top of cabinets, he balanced pieces of china decorated by his own heraldic flower,


154 Lisbet Koerner


Linnaea. borealis, as well as Chinese shell arrangements and Spanish cork statuettes of a type sold to sailors, and depicting Africans covered by mussel-shells. Over the sanded, broad-planked floors, Linnaeus scattered his botanical manuscripts, where blinded night-ingales splattered them with droppings and raccoons played and clawed among them. He dressed the ceilings in birdskins. And ‘together with other curiosities’ he hung his ‘Lapp’ costume (a trophy from the 1732 Lapland voyage) on the wall.
International fame
Philosophia botanica and the binomial nomenclature it recommended were received with enthusiasm. Reprinted ten times in Latin between 1755 and 1824, the book was also translated into English,,Dutch, Spanish, German, French, and Russian. An abundance of Linnaean primers also appeared, often written by gardeners and ‘empirics’. One prototype of the genre, James Lee’s Introduction to Botany (1760), went through eight editions. A competitor, Philip Miller’s Short Introduction ... to Botany (1760), even reached fifteen edi-tions. (Indeed, England especially celebrated Linnaeus.)
Numerous botanic dictionaries were also published. They were modelled on Linnaeus’s own plant vocabulary, Termini botanici (1762), which was itself reprinted twenty-two times before 1811. By the 1760s and across Europe, local floras, botanic plate publications, natural histories of foreign countries, and even species monographs and children’s books, now all used a Linnaean vocabulary. Linnaeus was a household word among the educated public, and a fashion spread across Europe for the botany he had made accessible to lay people.
In the 1730s and 1740s certain naturalists had suggested that Linnaeus’s sexual system was immoral (J. Siegesbeck, St Petersburg), that he should return to Theophrastus (J. J. Dillenius, Oxford), or that he should instead develop an alphabetical taxonomy (Sir Hans Sloane, London). More importantly, at Gottingen, the eminent Albrecht von Haller (1708-77) advocated biogeographical criteria for classification. At Edinburgh the anti-sexualist school cast doubt even on the notion that plants had two sexes. And in Paris, Michel Adanson (1727-1806), counting in the preface to Families des plantes (1763-4) over sixty natural botanic systems so far, went on to demonstrate (contra Linnaeus’s sexual system) that no known single characteristic could satisfactorily divide plant groups.17
The century’s most famous naturalist next to Linnaeus himself, Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon (1707-88), vigorously mocked his competitor in the ‘Initial Discourse’ (1749) of his celebrated Histoire naturelle. ‘This large tree which you see is perhaps only a bloodwort. It is necessary to count its stamens in order to know what it is.’1


Carl Linnaeus in his time and place


155


Through Denis Diderot and L. J. M. Daubenton, Buffon’s condem-nation became a commonplace in salons and in the Encyclopédie.19 Julien Offray de la Mettrie even wrote a pornographic L'homme plante (1748), which was dedicated to Linnaeus and diagnosed a ‘plant-woman’ according to the sexual system.
Linnaeus in turn read his critics through 2 Samuel 7:9: ‘And I . . . have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight’. This biblical quotation he regarded as prophesying his eventual victory over that ‘Frenchman named Buffon, who’ (Linnaeus always dismissed the comte as a kind of gardener) ‘lived in the Botanical Garden in Paris, as Inspector, and always wrote against Linnaeus’.
Linnaeus also became famous for wider cultural reasons. In his handbooks he condemned rhetoric, and he attempted to banish from his science the use of language as a means; of persuasion or for emotional effect. Philosophia botanica explicitly bans tropes such as synecdoche, metaphor, and irony. This preference for a plain style is of course itself a rhetoric, related to Linnaeus’s cultivation of himself as a ‘Gothic’ moralist opposed to all things courtly and French. Yet the neo-classicists, primitivists, and Romantics of the later eighteenth century were themselves at once nostalgic and stern, and in pursuit of an unmediated language of authenticity. They thus could claim Linnaeus as their precursor, even if his attacks on civilization derived from very different sources, namely his Lutheran and Carolingian childhood.
Thus it was for the moral qualities believed to be intrinsic to his botany that Linnaeus was so admired by Jean-Jacques ‘Russau’ (as Linnaeus, who was hazy on who he was, spelled his name). Rous-seau’s hugely popular Lettres élémentaires sur la botanique, written between 1771 and 1773 to educate a four-year-old girl, in turn molded the female fad for Linnaean botany in the later eighteenth century. It also inspired the Parisian Société d’Histoire Naturelle (founded by ‘lovers of freedom’ in 1790) to erect a statue of Linnaeus in the Jardin des Plantes, and thus symbolically to close off Buffon’s reign.
In England, Erasmus Darwin’s The Botanic Garden, Part II: Containing the Loves of the Plants (1789), dedicated to ‘ladies and other unemploy’d scholars’, was also important. And in Germany, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who himself was much taken by Rousseau’s Letters, made debating Linnaeus a pastime in fashion-able Romantic circles. Like Rousseau, Goethe carried Philosophia botanica along on his country walks. Goethe also claimed to have had only three teachers in life - Shakespeare, Spinoza, and Linnaeus - adding pointedly for the last, ‘not however in botany!’20 It was the provincial naturalist’s anti-rhetorical stance, and his appeals to virtue, that appealed to Europe’s most cel-ebrated man of letters.


156 Lisbet Koerner


>

Religious beliefs
In 1739 Linnaeus gave the inaugural speech at the Swedish Acad-emy of Science which he had just co-founded. It discussed the economy of nature by means of ‘curiosities among insects’, and on the model of the Lutheran sermon. Linnaeus subscribed to the natural theology of William Derham’s Physico-Theology or, Demon-stration of the Being and Attributes of God from His Works of Creation (1713) and John Ray’s Wisdom of God Manifested in His Works of Creation (1686). Nature, he believed, was one single, self-regulating global entity. Since unchecked population growth would outstrip nature’s sustaining capacity, the regulatory mechanism of natural equilibria was thus what he called ‘a war of all against all’ and regarded as embodied both in predator-prey relations and in general competition for resources. Linnaeus understood compe-tition as taking place between, and not within, species. He also saw it as a principle of continuity, not of change.
At other times Linnaeus considered nature as only the animated setting for salvation history. Domesticating the wilderness, he believed, meant restoring it to an Edenic state. He could not grasp the real possibility of extinction of life-forms by human agency. From his doorstep, he placidly rejoiced in the wild fauna’s self- evident and continuing presence as storks waded in his backyard ditch, and eagles (hunting hens) dove into his garden.
- Yet in Linnaeus’s days the North Atlantic heather moors were still spreading. He himself describes how, in a rainy Swedish countryside which goat-grazing was turning into a desert, he walked on sand dunes so large and so fast-moving that along the dune ridges there protruded from the sand the tops of still green and leafy tree canopies.
Still Linnaeus assumed nature to be indestructible. One of his students, describing Surinam’s rain forests in 1755, agreed. ‘I am sure, that this huge Hothouse will stand un-mutilated, as long as the earth [itself].’21 In Linnaeus’s eyes, too, ‘the most wonderful [region] in the world’ was Scania (south Sweden). For this grain- field desert, shaded only by a few coppiced willows and horn-beams, was, as Linnaeus fondly recalled, ‘a plain without moun-tains, hills, stones, rivers, lakes, trees or bushes’.22
Linnaeus thus viewed nature as a prelapsarian paradise, contain-ing within each nation all the natural productions necessary for a complete and complex economy. Yet why then did people suffer and even starve in the midst of this posited material plenty? In his spiritual diary Nemesis Divina (late 1750s), a testimonial to God’s working in history, Linnaeus elaborated a bleak theodicy. Discounting miracles or indeed any benign divine intervention, he


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 157


collected some 200 case histories of divine retribution. Some stories linger over how unwed mothers, or ‘whores’, die by scaldings and burns, as if that was the appropriate end to their inflamed passions. Others chronicle how officers, themselves mutilated in battle, had mangled hapless civilians in drinking bouts. Yet others explained the sufferings of moral innocents (such as infants) by ancestral sins. Linnaeus also noted that a colleague who dared to argue with him at a faculty meeting, at that instant fell down in a swoon, to be carried home, a cripple from that day on.
With such punishments, Linnaeus additionally suggested, God’s interest in humankind ceased. For, while idealizing nature, Lin-naeus was less sure of man’s role in it. He repeatedly asked whether he should ‘call man ape or vice versa?’23 (As a counterpart to Homo sapiens, he described a Simia sapiens that played backgammon.) He argued that animals possessed souls and that, conversely, humans were mortal. Immortality belonged solely to a personal entity he called ‘the eternal force’, ‘the world soul’, or ‘nature’, and understood as animated creation, put in place by a distant sky-god he called ‘the wisdom’ or ‘the intention’.
Redemption, then, had no place in Linnaeus’s faith. Linnaeus even suspected that God made nature for his own enjoyment, as a kind of toy, since otherwise he would have created the globe as ‘an [edible] mass, wherein we would have ate and slept like the worm in the cheese’.24 He bitterly noted that ‘when [God] doesn’t want to keep / us, / we are removed. / [He] let others be put in our place. / Thus nature dooms us, contra Theology’.25 In his dia-ries the grief-stricken father also likened his dying children to ‘snow crystals’ and ‘candle ends’.
On a more optimistic note, Linnaeus positioned his own natural science as a material theodicy, enabling humankind to harvest and prepare the natural productions of their homelands. Here he explained suffering, and especially Scandinavia’s many famines, by ignorance. ‘The sciences are thus the light that will lead the people who wander in darkness.’26
A parson’s son in the fifth generation, Linnaeus analogized him-self to a Luther of science. In a manuscript classification of natural-ists, he entered next to the category 'Reformatio’ only two words - 'ego’ and 'mihi’. In the same spirit, he divided botanists into ‘het-erodox’ (non-Linnaeans) and ‘orthodox’ (Linnaeans). And he took 1 Kings 17:8, ‘and the word of the LORD came unto him’, to be a Biblical prophecy of his binomial nomenclature.27 Linnaeus also likened himself to Moses on the mountain, and even, as on the frontispiece of the 1760 Lange edition of Systema naturae, to Adam. Collapsing time, he at once names the animals and writes the Systema.


158 Lisbet Koerner


Medicine and anthropology
Linnaeus’s doctoral dissertation (Harderwijk, Holland, 1735), was on a medical topic, the cause of malaria. Between 1738, when he returned from Holland, and 1741, when he was appointed pro-fessor of medicine at Uppsala University, Linnaeus practised medi-cine in Stockholm, and was made the chief physician to the Swed-ish navy. He typically sought' environmental roots of diseases, arguing for example that epilepsy was caused by washing one’s hair, ergotism by eating radish seeds, and malaria by drinking muddy water.
Linnaeus was also deeply involved in questions of child-rearing. Together with his Uppsala colleague Nils Rosén von Rosenstein, a founder of paediatric medicine, he battled wet-nursing, baby farms, swaddling, and the doping of infants with gin. He described, with a furious sorrow, how he encountered small vic-tims of physical abuse, ‘lame, hunchbacked, or covered with runny wounds’.28
Later in life, Linnaeus felt that nature’s division into male and female principles provided an overarching ‘double key to medi-cine’. Earlier, however, he had argued that medicine should be ‘taken from the principles of zoology . . . man is an animal and ought to live like an animal’.29 Linnaeus rewrote Sweden’s pharma-copoeia for mostly indigenous herbal simples, and he and his stud-ents carefully studied'folk medicine, of both ‘wild nations’ (tribal people) and Scandinavian peasants. Thus, on his 1732 Lapland voyage, Linnaeus emphasized the indigenous remedies of Arctic people, and ignored the Sami’s use of common Scandinavian med-icináis such as tobacco, vodka, beaver glands, and a crude form of moxibustion. He noted instead their use of reindeer cheese for frost damage, birch bark for wound dressing, and milfoil for intes-tinal parasites.
Linneaus also metaphorized his zoological medicine as a ‘return’ to older and more ‘natural’ mores. This, he held, had the power of eradicating what he saw as a single whole: poverty, disease, ignorance, and sin. It was thus a materio-moral enterprise, conflat-ing mind, body, and spirit. Broadly speaking, he envisioned a great chain, or universal scale, of health, reaching from ‘wild nations’ at the top, through European farmers and townsmen, to the lowest of all, French courtiers with their vile diseases.
Linnaeus’s primary example of a ‘wild nation’ was the Sami, the indigenous people of Scandinavia’s Arctic regions. They in fact suf-fered from colonial diseases such as alcohol addiction, and severe forms of measles and influenza. Linnaeus thus spent his 1732 Lap- land voyage convincing himself, in spite of overwhelming evidence


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 159




Figure 9.1 Here we see Linnaeus’s clumsy attempt to portray a pearlfisher’s craft, as he observed it at Purkijaur, Swedish Lapland, in 1732. Note, the long wooden tongs with which the pearlfisher, lying on his craft, picks mussels from the bottom of the river. Ink on paper drawing in his Lapland diary, Iter Lapponicum (1732), in E. Ahrling (ed.), Carl von Linnes ungdomsskrifter (Stockholm, 1888), p. 163.

to the contrary, that he had ‘discovered’ noble savages living in a natural state and a belated Ovidian Golden Age.
Since the Sami were Edenic beings, Linnaeus reasoned in turn, it followed that original sin was not all-pervasive. Neither Lutheran-ism (salvation by faith), nor Calvinism (salvation by grace), nor Catholicism (salvation by good works) applied. Instead, empirical field studies of ‘the Lapps’ customs, economy, diet, etc.’30 could reverse both sin and disease among Europeans. In Linnaeus’s hands, then, the noble savage became a token of a proximate sal-vation. Or, as he put it, ‘The Lapps are our teachers’.31
Yet at the same time, Linnaeus’s Lapland voyage aimed to eradi-cate the very possibility of this postulated new knowledge formation by cross-cultural mediation. He and his sponsors regarded the jour-ney as an exercise in ‘‘oeconomia’, or part of the ongoing exploitation of ‘our West-Indies’ (as Swedes called their Arctic frontier). And this colonial venture in turn was predicated on erasing indigenous culture, as the ‘wild’ Sami and their herds were chained to the engines of industry.
Reception history and conclusion
Linnaeus was given a grand funeral, on a dark winter’s evening in 1778. ‘His farmers, dressing in mourning, followed the carriage with torches.’32 All over Europe memorial addresses were delivered at scientific academies. (They were composed, as was customary in the period, by Linnaeus himself.) Eulogies were published in both the scientific and the popular press.
Yet in his homeland, Linnaeus was largely forgotten after his death. Indeed, natural history itself declined. Linnaeus the


16o Lisbet Koerner


Figure 9.2 This illustrates Linnaeus’s opposition of metaphor to plain description: one of the only two erotic drawings in his hand, and a plant description. Ink on paper drawing in his Lapland diary, in E. àhrling (ed.), Par/ von Linnés ungdomsskrifter (Stockholm, 1888), p. 68.



Younger failed entirely at Uppsala University. Other ageing stud-ents turned into pedantic and provincial professors of ‘practical economics’ (as Scandinavian chairs of Linnaean natural history were named). The study of nature only rejuvenated a generation later, with the Scandinavian reception of German Romantic morphology.
Linnaeus’s first public monument in Sweden was thus a modest funeral plaque placed in Uppsala Gathedral in 1798, twenty years after his death and eight years after Paris acquired a public statue. It remained his sole official commemoration until 1811. Linnaeus also fared badly within the historiography of his discipline. In 1875 the German plant physiologist Julius Sachs’s famous History of Botany categorized Linnaeus as an Aristotelian essentialist. For the next hundred years, most historians of science agreed. In 1965 Lin-naeus was even given a prominent role in ‘two thousand years of [scientific] stasis’.33
Between the 1870s and the 1930s, however, Linnaeus’s fame underwent a renaissance in Scandinavia. His place of birth was made into a museum in 1866, as were his country seat in 1879, his childhood home in 1935, and his town-house in 1937. ‘Linnaeus liqueur’ and ‘Linnaeus cakes’ were sold in cafés. Temperance lodges, cultural associations, and baby girls were all named after the great Swede, and poems, songs, and even a ballet were composed in his honour. His birthday, May 23rd, was pronounced ‘Linnaeus Day’ and sponsored by various state agencies as a national competi-tor to May 1st, International Workers’ Day. Flags were flown, schools closed, parades arranged, and keepsakes manufactured. In a time of rapid industrialization, mass emigration, and widespread


Carl Linnaeus in his tíme and place 161




Figure 9.3 Linnaeus’s ethnography illustrated by a rare drawing of a Same man carrying a canoe: note that ‘Same’ is the singular form of ‘Sami’. Ink on paper drawing in his Lapland diary, in E. Ahrling (ed.), Carl von Linnes ungdomsskrifter (Stockholm, 1888), p. 38.

social unrest, Sweden’s conservative elites thus launched Linnaeus as a ‘flower king’ who recaptured in his science the victories won by Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years War and Charles XII in the Great Northern Wars. Over time, such sentiments grew increas-ingly racialist, and the small, dark naturalist transmogrified into a blond and blue-eyed giant.
In the 1930s, and with theadventof a Social Democrat govern-ment, this cult of Linnaeus faded away. When a small town in his home region staged a ‘flower march’ for the 250th anniversary of his birth in 1957, Linnaeus was played by a schoolboy and placed on a tractor-drawn ‘flower-float’ next to a medieval saint, a Viking Amazon, and a magic midget. Further crowding the float were two ‘Lapps’ and ‘a great many small school-children more or less dis-guised as flowers’.34 Such marches hardly rekindled interest in Lin-naeus. Nor was a second Linnaean renaissance inaugurated by the breathless tabloid rubrics of the 1960s, such as ‘Linnaeus TV hero - if TV had existed’,35 ‘Linnaeus - our greatest PR-man?’,36 and ‘Not just flowers for the sex radical Linnaeus’.37
Linnaeus thus dwindled into a local hero whom (as a 1957 ques-tionnaire revealed) people dimly recalled as a ‘famous tee-totaller’, and who was listed in tourist brochures alongside midgets and Ama-zons. This trajectory of reception may seem like a funnel, where the magisterial Enlightenment scientist diminishes into a small bronze statue of a pre-pubescent boy, gazing at a flower by the grass-roofed cottage where he was born. Yet as it grew ever more localized and localizing, Linnaeus’s image also reflected a profound truth about him: he was from the start a quintessentially local man.


i62 Lisbet Koerner


Further reading
Atran, Scott, Cognitive Foundations of Natural History. Towards an Anthro-pology of Science (Cambridge, 1990).
Blunt, Wilfrid, The Compleat Naturalist. A Life of Linnaeus (London, 1971). Broberg, Gunnar (ed.), Linnaeus: Progress and Prospects in Linnaean
Research (Pittsburgh, 1980).
Fràngsmyr, Tore (ed.), Linnaeus, The Man and His Work (Berkeley, 1983; rev. ed., Canton, MA, 1994).
Heller, John Lewis, Studies in Linnaean Method and Nomenclature. Mar- burger Schriften zur Medizingeschichte, Band 7 (Frankfurt am Main, 1983).
Larson, James L., Reason and Experience. The Representation of Natural Order in the Work of Carl von Linné (Berkeley, 1971).
Linnaeus, Carl, A Tour in Lapland . . . ed. James Edward Smith, 2 vols. (London, 1811; fac. repr. New York, 1971).
Miscellaneous Tracts relating to Natural History, Husbandry, and Physick. To which is added the Calendar of Flora, rev., ed. and trans. B. Still- ingfleet (3rd ed., London, 1775; fac. repr. New York, 1977).
Smith, Sir James Edward, A Selection of the Correspondence of Linnaeus, and Other Naturalists, from the Original Manuscripts (London, 1821).
Stafleu, Frans Antonie, Linnaeus and the Linnaeans. The Spreading of their Ideas in Systematic Botany, 1735-1789 (Utrecht, 1971).
Stevens, P. F. and Cullen, S. P., ‘Linnaeus, the cortex-medulla theory, and the key to his understanding of plant form and natural relation-ships’, Journal of the Arnold Arboretum, 71 (April 1990), pp. 179-220.


LONDA SCHIEBINGER

IO Gender and natural history

The stylus of the female [plant] is the vagina while the vulva and the mons Venus . . . correspond to the stigma. Thus the uterus, vagina, and vulva make up the pistil - the name that modern botanists give to all the female parts of plants. ... As far as we men are concerned, a quick look is enough: sons of Priapus,1 spermatic animals, our stamen is rolled as in a cylindri-cal tube. The stamen is the penis, and the sperm is our fecundat-ing powder.
Julien Offray de La Mettrie, L’Homme plante (1748)

From Aristotle through Darwin, Freud and beyond, nature has been infused with sexuality and gender. Carl Linnaeus, the greatest taxonomist of his age, imagined that plants have vaginas and penises and reproduce on marriage beds. Gender traits ascribed to animals changed with shifting notions of masculinity and feminin-ity in Western culture. For Aristotle, writing long before the his-torical rise of the passionless female, mares were thought sexually wanton, said to ‘go a-horsing’ to satisfy their unbridled appetites. If not impregnated by a stallion, these dissolute females would be fertilized by the wind. By the late eighteenth century, females throughout nature - with the exception of Erasmus Darwin’s lusty flowers - were said to evince a patient modesty. Even among insects, females were thought to ‘repel the first [sexual] attacks of the males’ and in so doing win the respect of their paramours.2
My purpose in this chapter is to explore how gender - both the real relations between the sexes and ideological renderings of those relations - shaped European science in the eighteenth century, and botany in particular. Crucial for our story is the fact that, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Europeans who described nature were almost exclusively male, though for a while botany was considered a science particularly suited to women.3 While it is true that ladies of the middle and upper classes botanized actively, they primarily collected and dried plants, perhaps corre-sponded with leading botanical figures and prepared illustrations for publication. They were not taxonomists, nor among those

163



164 Londa Schiebinger


shaping the future course of the science. Even Maria Sibylla Merian, the adventurous German botanical illustrator and entomol-ogist who travelled to Surinam in search of exotic caterpillars in the early eighteenth century, presented only her observations, leaving classification to her male colleagues. In later years the traditional informal routes into science taken by Merian and others (the noble networks and craft guilds) were closed to women.4 Ann Shteir has shown that looking at women’s work in early nineteenth-century botany takes us into domestic spaces; women botanized in their kitchens and around their breakfast tables.5 When prescribed for women, botany was to provide pleasure and instil virtue; for botany in this era, especially in England, was considered a branch of natural religion leading to an appreciation of God and his universe.
In this chapter I explore not women's role in natural history, but how gender moulded certain aspects of early modern botany. We are aware of the consequences of exclusion for women: women have long lived at the margins of intellectual life. But what have been the consequences for science and human knowledge more generally? As we shall see, gender became one potent principle organizing eighteenth-century science, a matter of consequence in an age that looked to nature as the guiding light for social reform.
Plant (hetero)sexuality
Today it is recognized that many plants reproduce sexually. Plants (and plant parts) are also typed as male and female. But what does it mean to call a plant female or male? How did botanists in early modern Europe address this question?
As extraordinary as it seems today, it was not until the late sev-enteenth century that European naturalists began recognizing that plants reproduce sexually. The ancients, it is true, had some knowledge of sexual distinctions in plants. Theophrastus knew the age-old practice of fertilizing date-palms by bringing male flowers to the female tree. Peasants working the land also recognized sexual distinctions in trees such as the pistachio. Plant sexuality, however, was not the focus of interest in the ancient world. An eighteenth-century observer charged that the ancients were ignor-ant of what he considered the essential nature of sexuality in plants: they sometimes called the seed-bearing plant ‘the male’, and the barren plant ‘the female’.6
As late as the Renaissance, botanists gave names to what we today call the sexual parts of flowers that were not associated in any way with reproduction. The male organ was called the stamen, a Latin word denoting the warp thread of a fabric. The female organ was called pistil, a term suggesting the resemblance of those


Gender and natural history 165


>
flower parts to a pestle.7 Even the sixteenth-century revival of botany brought no immediate interest in the sexual nature of plants. Until the seventeenth century most botanists discounted the entire notion of plant sexuality as just another fable.
Plant sexuality exploded onto the scene in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Everyone wanted to claim the honour of having discovered the sexuality in plants. In France, Sébastien Vaillant and Claude Geoffroy tussled over priority. In England, Robert Thornton complained that the honour of this discovery was always given to the French, though properly it belonged to the English. Linnaeus, always keen to reap his due reward for scien-tific innovation (and not, in fact, the first to describe sexual repro-duction in plants), claimed that it would be difficult and of no utility to decide who first discovered the sexes of plants.
Systematic investigations into the sexuality of plants became a priority for naturalists in the late seventeenth century. Interest in assigning sex to plants ran ahead of any real understanding of ferti-lization, or the ‘coitus of vegetables’, as it was sometimes called.8 Botanists distinguished certain parts of plants as male and female, Claude Geoffroy reported, ‘without knowing well the reason’.9 Bot-anists such as Nehemiah Grew, who was the first to identify the stamen as the male part in flowers, developed their notion of plant sexuality from their knowledge of animals. In The Anatomy of Plants (1682) Grew reported that Sir Thomas Millington, a dis-tinguished physician, had suggested to him that ‘the attire’ (Grew’s term for the stamen) performs the function of the male in repro-duction. In quiet prose Grew worked out his analogies between plant and animal parts:
The blade (or stamen) does not unaptly resemble à small penis, with the sheath upon it, as its praeputium [prepuce]. And the ... several thecae, are like so many little testicles. And the globulets [pollen] and other small particles upon the blade or penis ... are as the vegetable sperme. Which as soon as the penis is errected, falls down upon the seed-case or womb, and so touches it with a prolific virtue.
Thus Grew ascribed maleness to the ‘blade’ of plants because it looked and functioned like the penis of animals. In a moment of unbridled enthusiasm, Grew declared that sexual dimorphism per-vaded the vegetable kingdom, that ‘every plant is . . . male or female’.10
By the early part of the eighteenth century, the analogy between animal and plant sexuality was fully developed. Linnaeus, in his Praeludia sponsaliorum plantarum (‘Preludes to the Betrothals of Plants’), related the terms of comparison: in the male, the filaments of the stamens are the vas deferens, the anthers are the testes, the pollen that falls from them when they are ripe is the seminal fluid;


i66 Londa Schiebinger


Figure io. i The English woman of letters, Priscilla Wakefield, nicely illustrated a hermaphroditic flower (a flower with both male and female parts) in her Introduction to Botany (London, 1796), plate 1. Letter ‘b’ shows the petals. Letter ‘c’ refers to the male stamen with its pollen- producing ‘anther’. Letter ‘d’ refers to the female pistil (she calls it a ‘pointal’) with its stigma, style, and germ (ovary).



in the female, the stigma is the vulva, the style becomes the vagina, the tube running the length of the pistil is the Fallopian tube, the pericarp is the impregnated ovary, and the seeds are the eggs. Julien Offray de La Mettrie, along with other naturalists, even claimed that the honey reservoir found in the nectary is equivalent to mother’s milk in humans.
Most flowers, however, are hermaphroditic with both male and female organs in the same individual. As one eighteenth-century botanist put it, there are two sexes (male and female) but three kinds of flowers: male, female, and hermaphrodites or, as they were sometimes called, androgynes. While most eighteenth- century botanists enthusiastically embraced sexual dimorphism, conceiving of plants as hermaphroditic was more difficult: they could not or would not recognize an unfamiliar sexual type. Wil-liam Smellie, who rejected the whole notion of sexuality in plants, distanced himself from the term hermaphrodite, noting when using the word that he merely spoke ‘the language of the system’.


Gender and natural history 167


Though eighteenth-century botanists were correct to recognize that many plants do reproduce sexually, they gave undue primacy to sexual reproduction and heterosexuality. Linnaeus was so taken with heterosexual coupling that he attributed this form of repro-duction to his Cryptogamia (‘plants that marry secretly’ - by which he meant ferns, mosses, algae, and fungi) - organisms that display little fixed sexuality let alone long-term relationships. Sexuality characterizes reproduction among the higher organisms but not the earth’s majority of organisms. The very fact that non-sexual repro-duction is called .sexual (a term of nineteenth-century origin expressing the absence of sex, though parthenogenesis had been recognized since the 1740s) reveals the normative preference given to sexual reproduction.
Linnaeus did not, however, stop with simple definitions of male-ness and femaleness. Not only were his plants sexed, but they actu-ally became humans; more specifically, they became husbands and wives. When Linnaeus introduced new terminology to describe the sexual relations of plants, he did not use the terms stamen and pistil but andria and gynia, which he derived from the Greek for husband (aner) and wife (gyne). The names of his classes of plants end in 'andria' (monandria, diandna, triandria and so on); his orders end in 'gynia' (monogynia, digyma, trigynia and so forth). One of the most striking elements in Linnaeus’s system is that plant sexuality takes place almost exclusively within the bonds of marriage. His text is filled with tender embraces of duly wedded couples:
The flowers’ leaves . . . serve as bridal beds which the Creator has so gloriously arranged, adorned with such noble bed curtains, and perfumed with so many soft scents that the bridegroom with his bride might there celebrate their nuptials with so much the greater solemnity. When now the bed is so prepared, it is time for the bridegroom to embrace his beloved bride and offer her his gifts.11
His renowned ‘Key to the Sexual System’ is founded on the nuptiae plantarum (the marriages of plants); the plant world is divided into major groups according to the type of marriage each plant has con-tracted - whether, for example, they have been wed ‘publicly’ or ‘clandestinely’. These two types of marriage, in fact, characterized custom in much of Europe; only in 1753 did Lord Hardwicke’s Marriage Act do away with clandestine marriages by requiring a public proclamation of banns.
It is significant that Linnaeus focused on marriage when he thought of sexuality. As Lawrence Stone has shown, marriage underwent rapid change throughout the late seventeenth and eight-eenth centuries. Upper-class parents and even wealthy peasants less often arranged marriages for their children out of property


i68 Londa Schiebinger


Figure 10.2 ‘Love attacks the herbs themselves’: sexual relations between a female (left) and a male (right) plant as portrayed in Linnaeus’s Praeludia sponsaliorum plantarum (1729), in N. H. Làrjungar and T. Fries (eds.), Smarre Skrifter af Carl von Linné (Uppsala, 1908).



considerations alone. Increasingly love and affection became legit-imate reasons for marriages. Men and women fell in love and cre-ated for themselves elaborate rituals of courtship as the middle- class romance was born.12 Linnaeus’s own marriage followed this pattern. He courted with tender expressions of love the daughter of a small-town physician (who also brought a substantial dowry to the marriage). As he wrote some years later, he left the running of his house entirely to his wife, and concerned himself with the works of nature.13
The notion that plants and animals reproduce within marital relations persisted into the nineteenth century. The term ‘gamete’ - adopted by biologists in the 1860s to refer to a germ cell capable of fusing with another cell to form a new individual - derives from the Greek gamein, meaning to marry.14


Gender and natural history 169


The eighteenth century also saw the rise of modern pornography with its emphasis on explicit description of genitalia and romantic encounters. The same forces - the loosening of traditional social controls - leading to Stone’s ‘companionate marriages’ also drove the relationship Margaret Jacob has described between the rise of the pornographic novel and mechanistic natural philosophy.15 Though Linnaeus’s plants celebrate nuptials, the majority do not engage in lawful marriage. Only one class of plants - Linnaeus’s monandria - practises monogamy. Plants in other classes join in marriages consisting of two, three, twenty or more ‘husbands’ who share their marriage bed (that is, the petals of the same flower) with one wife. Plant husbands of his ‘class xxiii’ - polygamia - live with their wives and harlots, later called concubines, in distinct marriage beds. Each of these ‘marriages’ signifies a particular arrangement of stamens and pistils on the flower. Monandria have but one stamen or husband on a hermaphroditic flower. Diandria have two stamens (or husbands) on a flower with one pistil, and so on.
There is no evidence, however, that Linnaeus, the Swedish country parson’s son, consciously wielded a pornographic pen, though he was sometimes accused of doing so. Raised in an upright, thrifty, Protestant family in rural Sweden, he was con-servative in his religious views (all of nature celebrating the glory of its Creator) and in his attitudes toward women. He would not allow his four daughters to learn French for fear that with the lan-guage they would adopt the liberties of French custom. When his wife placed their daughter Sophia in school, Linnaeus immediately took her out again, stopping what he considered ‘nonsensical’ edu-cation. He also refused Queen Louisa Ulrika’s offer to receive one of his daughters at court, thinking the court environment apt to corrupt morals.
Though we cannot be sure, it seems likely that Linnaeus did not introduce his explicitly sexual imagery as an affront to social custom. He simply tended to see anything female as a wife. He considered ‘Dame Nature’ as his other wife and true helpmeet. The celebrated botanical illustrator, Madeleine Basseporte, who worked at the Jardin du Roi in Paris, he called his second wife. Linnaeus called his own wife ‘my monandrian lily’; the lily signify-ing virginity and monandrian meaning ‘having only one man.’16
Plants were not the only organisms to suffer misplaced anthropo-morphism. The enormous influence that gender exerted on defi-nitions of sex in this period can also be seen in the sexing of bees. Jeffrey Merrick has shown that from the time of Aristotle until the mid-eighteenth century naturalists spoke of the ruling bee as ‘the king bee’, despite the fact that these ‘kings’ gave birth. Even after Swammerdam correctly identified the genitalia of the queen in the


170 Londa Schiebinger


1670s, naturalists persisted in their belief that the ruler of a hive must be a king. In this instance social function - the act of wield-ing sovereignty - held greater sway when assigning sex than did the biological act of giving birth. When, in the eighteenth century, entomologists finally dethroned the king bee, they domesticated the newly crowned queen, emphasizing her maternal role in order to accommodate their notions about the natural destiny of women.17

Gendering taxonomy
It is possible to distinguish two levels in the sexual politics of early modern botany: the explicit use of human sexual metaphors to introduce notions of plant reproduction into botanical literature, and the implicit use of gender to structure botanical taxonomy. In the section above we saw how botanists introduced plant sexuality through explicitly anthropomorphic thinking, ascribing to plants human form, function and even emotion. In this way botany con-tributed to the great interest in sexual difference characteristic of the eighteenth century.18 Sexual difference weighed heavily on the minds of Europeans as the Enlightenment issued its challenge that ‘all men [often interpreted as including women] are by nature equal.’ If women were not to be given rights in the newly imagined democratic orders, the nature of the female had to be investigated and shown to be unworthy. Debate over these issues, referred to in this era as the ‘woman question’, took place in a variety of texts and contexts, including medicine, literature, theology, coffee-houses, literary salons and political assemblies. The new botanical sciences participated in the making and remaking of sexuality in the Enlightenment.
There is a second level in the sexual politics of botany in this period, namely, the way that implicit notions of gender structured Linnaean taxonomy, to which we now turn. In the uproar that surrounded the introduction of notions of sexuality into botany, no one noticed that Linnaeus’s taxonomy - built as it was on sexual difference - imported into botany traditional notions about sexual hierarchy.
The ardent sexualization of plants coincided with the ‘scientiza- tion’ of botany. Within medieval cosmology, plant classification generally emphasized the usefulness of plants to human beings as foods and medicines. By the seventeenth century, botany still remained closely allied with medicine. Herbal texts, often arranged alphabetically, classified plants according to their use; each entry included a description of a plant’s appearance and its varieties, the season and place it could be collected, the parts to be used and methods for preserving it. Also included were a plant’s degrees of heat and moisture, its powers against particular ailments, dosages,


Gender and natural history
-----z----------------------------------:-----—-------------------------------:----i
and methods of preparation and administration.19 Knowledge of plants at this time was local and particular, derived from direct experience with plants in agriculture, gardening or medicine, or from knowledge handed down based upon that experience.
In the seventeenth century, academic botanists began to break their ties with medical practitioners. New plant materials from the voyages of discovery and the new colonies flooded Europe (the number of known plants quadrupled between 1550 and 1700) at the same time that an emphasis on observation increased discord between ancient texts and modern knowledge. The proliferation of knowledge required new methods of organization. Emphasis in classification turned from medical applications to more general and theoretical issues of pure taxonomy, as botanists sought simple principles for classification that would hold universally.
Linnaeus based his system on sexual difference because he recognized the importance of preservation of kind. For this reason, he considered the generative parts of plants, the stamens and pis-tils, ‘the very essence of the flower’. But the success of Linnaeus’s system did not rest on the fact that it was ‘natural’, that it captured true affinities between organisms. Determined to find the natural system, Linpaeus acknowledged none the less that his sexual system was highly artificial.20 Though focused on the most import-ant parts of the plant, his system did not capture fundamental sexual functions. Rather it concentrated on purely morphological features (i.e. the number and mode of unions) - exactly those characteristics of the male and female organs least important to reproduction.
Linnaeus devised his system in such a way that the number of a plant’s stamens (or male parts) determined the class to which it was assigned, while the number of its pistils (the female parts) determined its order (Figure 10.3). In the taxonomic tree, class stands above order. In other words, Linnaeus gave male parts pri-ority in determining the status of the organism in the plant king-dom. There is no empirical justification for this outcome; rather Linnaeus brought traditional notions of gender hierarchy whole- cloth into science. He read nature through the lens of social relations in such a way that the new language of botany incorpor-ated fundamental aspects of the social world where women were legally subordinate to fathers and husbands. Although today Lin-naeus’s classification of groups above the rank of genus has been abandoned, his binomial system of nomenclature remains, together with many of his genera and species.
It was not by chance or genius, then, that Linnaeus’s system gained such currency in the eighteenth century, amidst upheavals surrounding the nature and definition of sexuality and sexual roles in that century. Linnaeus focused on sexuality as one of his


172 Londa Schiebinger


principal taxonomic divisions because he saw the sex organs as the most important organs of the plant. He saw plants in this way because he viewed them through an eighteenth-century lens. Sexual images were prominent in botanists’ language at the same time that botanical taxonomy recapitulated the most prominent and contested aspects of European sexual hierarchy.
Plant sexuality, sensibility and the ‘woman question’
Linnaeus’s sexual system of classification was one among many proposed in the eighteenth century. By 1799, in his popular ver-sion of the Linnaean system, Robert Thornton counted fifty-two different systems of botany.21 Botanists based their systems on dif-ferent parts of the plant, such as the flower, calyx, seed, and seat- coat or the corolla and the fruit. Others, including Albrecht von Haller, continued to argue that geography was crucial to an under-standing of plant life and that development as well as appearance should be represented in a system of classification.
Despite the number and variety of systems, Linnaeus’s sexual system was widely adopted across Europe after the publication of the second edition of his Systema naturae in 1737, and until the first decades of the nineteenth century was generally considered the most convenient system of classification. Only in France did Linnaeus face strong opposition. For one thing, French natural history remained vibrant throughout the eighteenth century. The Parisian dynasty of naturalists - de Jussieu - took little interest in Linnaeus’s artificial system of classification, preferring instead to continue their countryman Tournefort’s efforts to develop what they considered a ‘natural’ system. Linnaeus also encountered a formidable opponent in Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon, director of the Jardin du Roi (now the Jardin des Plantes). Buffon, born the same year (1707) as Linnaeus and his principal rival, opposed system building generally and ridiculed Linnaeus’s system in particular for being too abstract and artificial, and for depending on characteristics so minute and inconsequential that a naturalist had to carry a microscope into the field in order to recognize a plant.22
Linnaeus took England by storm in the 1750s and 1760s. His sexual system gained easy acceptance in Britain because academic natural history had been in decline since the 1720s; the classifica- tory advances of John Ray (one of the first to develop a system based on natural affinities) had persisted since the late seventeenth century but without further interest or development. During this same period, however, natural history - especially entomology, conchology and, eventually, botany - became popular among the


Gender and natural history 173

—-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------y

C AM) LI Lb’S iVEJ f I .ASSIES 14 TE &AL



Figure 10.3 ‘Carolus Linnaeus’s Classes or Letters’. Printed with Linnaeus’s Systema naturae beginning with the second edition (1737).

fashionable. Well-born ladies, including the Duchess of Beaufort, the Duchess of Portland and Mrs. Eleanor Glanville, led the way, collecting rare and exotic plants from all over the world.23 The royal family (George III, Queen Charlotte and his mother Augusta - all botanical enthusiasts) further enhanced the popular-ity of botany by serving as influential patrons and enlarging the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew.
But it was also in Britain that bloody and protracted battles erupted almost immediately over the scientific and moral implications of Lin-naeus’s sexual system. ‘Anti-sexualists’ (those opposing Linnaeus’s system) attacked Linnaeus’s work primarily on empirical grounds. William Smellie, chief compiler of the first edition of the Encyclopae-dia Britannica (1771), blasted the ‘alluring seductions’ of the analogi-cal reasoning upon which the sexualist hypothesis was founded and argued that it did not stand up to facts of experience. Many animals (he mentioned polyps and millipedes) reproduce without sexual embraces, and if many species of animals are destitute of ‘all the


174 Londa Schiebinger


endearments of love’, what, he asked, should induce us to fancy that the oak or mushroom enjoy these distinguished privileges?24
In addition to his ontological qualms, Smellie denounced Lin-naeus for taking his analogy ‘far beyond all decent limits’, claim-ing that Linnaeus’s metaphors were so indelicate as to exceed the most ‘obscene romance-writer’.25 Smellie’s sentiments were shared by others. The Revd Samuel Goodenough, later Bishop of Car-lisle, wrote to the founder of the Linnean Society in 1808, ‘a literal translation of the first principles of Linnaean' botany is enough to shock female modesty. It is possible that many virtuous students might not be able to make out the similitude of Clitoria., Even Goethe thought the innocence of the young, particularly girls, should not be exposed to works setting out the ‘dogma of sexuality’.26 Faced with such opposition, the authors who popu-larized Linnaeus’s system in England - John Miller, James Smith and John Rotheram - made little use of his sexual imagery.
Erasmus Darwin (Charles Darwin’s grandfather), however, writ-ing during the upheavals surrounding the French Revolution brought the Linnaean sexual system to full bloom in his The Laves of the Plants, elaborating Linnaeus’s ideas in a way that might well have shocked Linnaeus himself. Unlike Linnaeus’s, Darwin’s plants did not limit sexual relations to the bonds of holy matrimony. Rather, they freely expressed every imaginable form of heterosexual union. The fair Collinsonia - sighing with sweet concern - satisfied the love of two brothers by turns. The Meadia (an ordinary cowslip) bowed with ‘wanton air’, rolled her dark eyes, and waved her golden hair as she gratified each of her five beaux. Three youthful swains succumbed to the riper years of the Gloriosa.27
Darwin was not the conservative that Linnaeus was. He was an atheist, an advocate of liberty, equality (for middle-class men) and abolition of the slave trade, and he welcomed the French Revol-ution. Darwin, under the cover of poetic licence, may well have been advocating the free love that he himself practised after the death of his first wife. Though Darwin was a democrat and material-ist, it should be pointed out that his radicalism with respect to women was measured. His Plan for the Conduct of Female Education, written for the school set up by his illegitimate daughters at Ash-bourne, was in step with the new middle-class prescriptions in advo-cating distinct roles for men and women in society.28
Remarkably, neither Darwin’s style nor his liberal politics dis-turbed the public when his The Laves of the Plants first appeared as part II of his The Botanic Garden in 1789. The initial indifference to Darwin’s unorthodox opinions has been explained as a result of the relative social stability that England had enjoyed since the 1750s.29 In this atmosphere mild expression of unorthodoxy by men of the gentry and professional classes could safely be tolerated. As


Gender and natural history 175


Roy Porter has argued, the Enlightenment had also ushered in more tolerant views of human sexuality. Sex was no longer seen as a sin or vice, but as part of the economy of nature - a natural impulse that should find free expression. Free love was not only discussed among elites, it was practised: pornographic journals began appearing from the 1770s; erotic novels proliferated; men of sub-stance walked in public with their mistresses; and bastards grew up as accepted members of the family (though without inheriting the family name or property). Sexuality expressed within the bounds of upper-class sensibility and decorum could be tolerated because it did not pose a serious threat to social order.30
The French Revolution shattered this calm. The Rev. Richard Polwhele, writing shortly afterwards, asserted that the open teaching of the sexual system in botany encouraged unauthorized sexual unions. For him, democratic tendencies, liberated and irreligious women and free love all threatened to undermine English society. In The Unsex’d Females, Polwhele attacked that Amazonian band of ‘female Quixotes of the new philosophy’ for adopting the senti-ments and manners of republican France and singled out Mary Wollstonecraft, author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, as the prophetess of the movement. In a striking passage Polwhele exploited the full potential of botanical allegory, which he so despised, in order to paint for the reader a vivid picture of Wollstonecraft’s ‘disgraceful’ life:
But hark! lascivious murmurs melt around;
And pleasure trembles in each dying sound.
A myrtle bower, in fairest bloom array’d To laughing Venus streams the silver shade . . .
Bath’d in new bliss, the Fair-one [Wollstonecraft] greets the
bower
And ravishes a flame from every flower;
Low at her feet inhales the master’s sighs, and darts voluptuous poison from her eyes.
Yet, while each heart pulses, in the Paphian grove,
Beats quick to Imlay and licentious love.3'
Polwhele is wilfully ambiguous in the poem; the reader is left uncertain whether Wollstonecraft actually becomes one of Dar-win’s ‘adulterous’ plants or if her libertine relations simply take place in the heaving floral bower.
In any case the message was clear: association with plants leads to licentious love. In his notes Polwhele explained how Wollstone- craft’s liaisons in England with Henry Fuseli, the well-known painter who provided several illustrations for Darwin’s The Botanic Garden, and in France with the American writer Gilbert Imlay, led her to attempt suicide from which she was rescued by Godwin only to die soon thereafter in childbirth. An early death, in


176 Londa Schiebinger


Polwhele’s view, was a just end to a dissolute life. Our botanizing girls, he wrote, are worthy disciples of Miss Wollstonecraft. These ‘unsex’d females’, sworn enemies to blushes, he lamented, throw aside their modesty - that ‘brilliant ornament’ of their sex.32
On the heels of the Revolution, when women failed to receive political rights and professional privileges, separation of spheres set specific limits to women’s ambitions and opportunities. In this pre- Victorian era plants were often stripped of sexuality, especially for women of the middle classes. Priscilla Wakefield’s Introduction to Botany (1796) is interesting in this regard. In these letters on botany written to her sister she traced the canonical analogy between plants and animals from the bark serving as ‘skin’ to sap as the plant’s ‘blood’, but completely desexualized the plant. The anther (the male part) does not resemble a penis but a ‘kind of a box’ that opens when it is ripe. Fertilization between plants was reduced to ‘communication’. Wakefield allowed only that the seed resembles the eggs of animals. In another passage Wakefield remarked that male and female orchids are distinguished from one another ‘but without any reason for that distinction’.33
Gender in science
The question of women engaging in science is not just a question of equality—whether all people should have an equal opportunity to pursue careers of their choosing. Nor is it a question of ‘man-power’, having enough scientists to sharpen a chosen nation’s com-. petitive edge, as is often discussed today. It is a question of knowl-edge. Only recently have we begun to appreciate that who does science affects the kind of science that gets done.
Had women been among eighteenth-century taxonomists would debates about plant sexuality and the place of female organisms in nature have been different? It is difficult or even impossible to say how things might have been. The point is to appreciate how knowledge has been moulded historically. What I have tried to show is how knowledge is shaped by who is included in science and who is excluded, which projects are pursued and which ignored, whose experiences are validated and whose not, and who stands to gain in terms of wealth or well-being and who does not.34 That Europeans modelled plant sexuality on culturally sanctioned heterosexual unions cannot be blamed on the short-sightedness of a few individuals alone, but can be traced to broader social trends of which science was a part.
The sex of participants in science should not necessarily be important to the results of science. We must recognize, however, that Western culture is highly gendered. Scientists added their increasingly authoritative voices to the explosive debates about women and their role society. Yet scientists did not work from


Gender and natural history 177


a privileged vantage-point above the rough and tumble of political struggle - science itself was part of the terrain that divided the sexes.35 Often scientists’ fundamental understandings of males and females, plants and animals were informed by and shaped emerg-ing ideals of modern middle-class masculinity and femininity, ideals which reinforced women’s professional and political disen-franchisement. It is in this context that it makes a difference who does science today.
We are just beginning to unravel how deeply gender has been worked into nature’s body. Historical exposé, of course, is not enough, for like a variant on Penelope’s shroud, what we unravel by night is often rewoven by day in ongoing workaday institutions of science. Science - its methods, priorities and institutions - must be recast to allow women and their concerns to fit comfortably within it. Scientists need to become aware not just of how history shapes the present, but also how what is studied - and what has been neglected - grows out of who is doing the studying, and for what ends.

Further reading
Abir-Am, Pnina and Outram, Dorinda (eds.), Uneasy Careers and intimate Lives: Women in Science, 1789-1979 (New Brunswick, 1987).
Benjamin, Marina (ed.), A Question of identity: Women, Science, and Litera-ture (New Brunswick, 1993).
Bennett, Jennifer, Lilies of the Hearth: The Historical Relation Between Women and Plants (Camden, Ont., 1991).
Broberg, Gunnar (ed.), Linnaeus: Progress and Prospects in Linnaean Research (Stockholm, 1980).
Delaporte, Fran.ois, Nature’s Second Kingdom: Explorations of Vegetality in Eighteenth Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Cambridge, MA, 1982).
Frangsmyr, Tore (ed.), Linnaeus: The Man and His Work (Berkeley, 1983). Harding, Sandra, Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women’s
Lives (Ithaca, 1991).
Harding, Sandra and O’Barr, Jean (eds.), Sex and Scientific inquiry (Chicago, 1987).
Keller, Evelyn Fox, Secrets of Life, Secrets of Death, Essays on Language, Gender, and Science (New York, 1992).
Kevles, Bettyann, Females of the Species: Sex and Survival in the Animal Kingdom (Cambridge, MA, 1986).
Schiebinger, Londa, The Mind Has No Sex? Women in the Origins of Modem Science (Cambridge, MA, 1989).
Nature’s Body: Gender in the Making of Modem Science (Boston, 1993).
Stroup, Alice, A Company of Scientists: Botany, Patronage, and Community at the Seventeenth-Century Parisian Royal Academy of Sciences (Berkeley, 1990).
Tuana, Nancy (ed.), Feminism and Science (Bloomington, 1989).


EMMA S P ARY

II Political, natural and bodily economies

The word ‘economy’ suggests to us today a financial system which structures our individual lives, our society and the hierarchy of political power. That notion of a global economy of money, ‘the economy’, did not exist in late eighteenth-century Europe; Enlight-enment writers were engaged in defining what an economy was, and indeed what wealth was, during precisely this period. We still retain many of the expressions they employed, however. Today we often discuss the economy in natural terms— we speak of the ‘health’ of the economy or about its ‘recovery’. It has been argued that, in the use of such bodily terms to describe State operations, one can trace moves from mechanical to organic analogies of the State.1 But eighteenth-century writers did not treat the State as a fixed and disembodied entity, something that late twentieth-century society takes for granted. In examining how the age of improvement con-structed the relationship between State and individual, between pol-itical and natural economies, it is useful to invert the argument: to look at the ways in which nature and natural bodies were discussed in economic terms in the eighteenth century.
Nowadays it is a commonplace among members of Western industrial societies to be concerned with the ‘balance’ of the econ-omy. Eighteenth-century naturalists, too, were deeply concerned to interpret the balance of nature for their audience. Typical of the human interpretations given to such views was Carl Linnaeus’s argument in De politia naturae (‘On the Polity of Nature’) (1760) that nature made men have wars in order to reduce their numbers. For Linnaeus (1707-78), as for many of his contemporaries, both the functions within the individual and the balance of species in the natural world as a whole formed an integrated ‘economy of nature’: a universal plan which was open to man’s understanding. By study-ing the laws of nature, naturalists could come to understand how God managed the natural world through the placing of powers within it. In turn, man was privileged to make use of that economy for his own ends; and, providing he followed the laws that natural-ists could reveal, man could follow the Divine example and manage nature.
In eighteenth-century France, domestic animals were ‘governed’,

178



Political, natural and bodily economies 179


but so were the poor; natural metaphors abounded in discussions on government, policing, management, and ruling. In English, French, and German discourses at this time, children, in being educated, were being ‘cultivated’ just like plants.2 Thus, the link that naturalists like Linnaeus repeatedly affirmed, between natural historical language, Divine action, and naturalists’ role in govern-ment related the natural historical enterprise closely to the new forms of government of the lower orders that were being invented in the second half of the eighteenth century.
Improvement and management
For Linnaeus, natural productions had been placed in the world to serve mail’s purposes. Like many of his contemporaries, the Swedish naturalist foresaw great benefits for the human species accruing from increasing knowledge of the relationships between natural productions. Related plants, for example, might share simi-lar medicinal or nutritional virtues. But he maintained that it would be necessary to know all natural beings before the universal natural order could be found.
Man’s task, in Linnaeus’s economy, was to study the natural history of his country and the world in order to perfect the self- sufficiency of the nation, and the physical and social state of its inhabitants. Such an improving perspective fuelled many natural historical writings and practices in this period, but it was also, often in close connection with natural history, being elaborated in the writings of eighteenth-century political economists such as Adam Smith and the physiocrat Fran.ois Quesnay. Improvement became immensely popular in the latter half of the eighteenth cen-tury, as Europe’s monarchs and ministers came to see natural his-tory and the introduction of new species of plants and animals as a certain way to increase national revenues and private wealth.3 Enlightened proprietors began to ameliorate their own lands; implementing the new agricultural and industrial practices was seen as the route to moral self-improvement, which simultaneously served the nation. The 1760s were the decade of agromania, as one contemporary commentator noted.4
Naturalists connected to State establishments of natural history also found improving policies to their liking, since they offered naturalists the opportunity to fill their gardens with new plants, whilst at the same time becoming the most patriotic of scientific practitioners. Linnaeus’s success in introducing the banana at the Hartekamp garden in the 1730s became legendary, and was used by other naturalists to encourage sceptical patrons to fund other attempts to introduce new plants across Europe.
Notions of natural and national economy were closely linked for


i8o Emma Spary




Figure 11.1 The first banana plant to flower in Europe. From C. Linnaeus, Musa Cliffortiana, quo in horto Hartecampiano floruit (1736).



managers of big natural historical centres like Linnaeus. Good management of institutions won patrons’ respect and increasing freedom of action for enlightened naturalists such as André Thouin (1747-1826) and Louis-Jean-Marie Daubenton (1716-99) at the Jardin du Roi in Paris, and Joseph Banks (1743-1820) and William Aiton at Kew. These naturalists regarded good management of the natural economy as the way for nations in particular, and the human race in general, to improve and to achieve happiness. Establishments like Kew and the Jardin du Roi were, in them-


Political, natural and bodily economies 181


selves, sites at which models of good government could be tested by enlightened managers like Thouin, who was responsible for the good behaviour of large numbers of specimens, subordinates, and visitors every day.
The moral economy of the body
Besides the wider notion of an economy of nature, naturalists also employed a more local notion of economy in talking about the body. Animals and plants had individual economies which were open to investigation by naturalists and others, including medical men, philosophers, and theologians.5 Medical accounts of the soul as the controller of bodily function derived from the classical medi-cal writings: the Hippocratic corpus, Aristotle, and Galen. It is to the Latin for ‘soul’ (animus) that we owe the term ‘animal’; but classical accounts also conferred a vegetative soul, controlling growth, upon plants. The animal soul controlled functions which plants did not possess, such as movement and feeling. Man, at the head of the scale of being, possessed a rational soul which enabled thought and judgement. Over several centuries, the classical medi-cal soul had been assimilated into the tradition of Western Chris-tianity, and physicians debated its relations with the Christian immortal soul, which was able to receive revealed knowledge. Thus, well before the eighteenth century, discourses about the soul had not only acquired natural historical or medical meanings but also implications for religion and government.
In 1740 a young man, Abraham Trembley, working as a tutor in Normandy, wrote to his patron in Paris, René Ferchault de Réaumur (1683-1757), to tell him of a new insect which he had found and which appeared to have startling powers. When Trem-bley had dissected it, he left the remains in his collecting jar for a few days, and found to his astonishment that, instead of putrefy-ing and dying, each half of the little polyp had regenerated to pro-duce two new individuals. This faculty for regeneration from parts produced a shock-wave which reverberated through the Parisian scientific world and beyond. The Paris Academy of Sciences had waged a long campaign over previous decades to defeat a view of the animal body as a purely material mechanism, a view derived from the writings of Descartes. Since the 1660s Cartesians had used this materialistic model of the animal body to argue for an atheist account of the natural world, one in which God’s inter-vention had no place.6
By contrast, the Paris Academy of Sciences supported a world-view that explicitly sought to place God at the centre of the oper-ations of the natural world; and it was as a part of this enterprise that they adopted a Newtonian programme of investigation into


182 Emma Spary


Figure 11.2 Different experiments on the body of the polyp. From A. Trembley, Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire d’un nouveau genre de polypes ... (Leiden, 1770), plate il. Figures 2 to 4 show the polyp regenerating from a cut section.



divinely-implanted natural forces like electricity, gravity and mag-netism.7 Experiments could display the powers of the soul, which were likewise of Divine origin. In the early eighteenth century, French academicians gathered evidence proving that animals had souls, in order to combat the Cartesian notion of the beast- machine; the beaver’s ability to build dams, for example, was highly prized evidence for the existence of its soul. Naturalists wrote at length on animals’ power to feel and think. In the assimi-lation of the medical and theological soul to the Paris Academy’s natural philosophical programme of the early eighteenth century, the animal soul had itself acquired the characteristics of unique individuality characteristic of Christian (human) souls.
By the 1730s the debate had largely been resolved in favour of


Political, natural and bodily economies 183


the souled animal, rather than the beast-machine - at least, it no longer appeared in the press. The new discovery of the polyp seemed to shatter that position, however. If new individuals could be made simply by the mechanical process of cutting, the impli-cation was that even the powers of the soul with which anti- Cartesians endeavoured to discredit the mechanistic world-view were, in fact, no more than purely material - inherent in the fabric of the body itself. Such problems were made explicit in the work of the radical medical reformer Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709-51), who initially portrayed himself as an ardent Newtonian. After 1740, however, his writings frequently referred both to the polyp and to the other animals which a frenzy of experimentation showed had similar ‘budding’ properties.8 In L’Anirnal machine (‘The Animal a Machine’) (1746), L’Homme planted Mai} a Plant’) (1748) and finally L’Homme machine (‘Man a Machine’) (1748), La Mettrie’s view of how the world worked provided progressively more mechanical and materialist explanations for the functioning of animals, plants and man. Over the same period he shifted from praising Newton to praising Descartes and attacking the Lockean theory of the animal soul; eventually he concluded that the soul was absolutely indistinguishable from matter. His writings were violently attacked and banned by the royal censors, which meant that copies were confiscated and publicly mutilated. In an atheist, non-Pro vidential world, neither the divine right of kings nor the stability of society could be guaranteed; La Mettrie’s world-view threatened all aspects of the careful structures for the maintenance of public order that existed in the old regime in France, and con-temporaries regarded him as mad.
In his Contemplation de la nature of 1764, which was widely read, Trembley’s relative Charles Bonnet (1720-94), the Genevan natural philosopher, attempted to combat materialist accounts of gener-ation with his own version: all living things pre-existed as invisible germs, encapsulated one within the other ad infinitum. Nature’s plan was discernible in the unfolding through time of pre-formed creatures. This preformationist doctrine derived from accounts of animal generation advanced by seventeenth-century natural philos-ophers attacking Cartesian atheism and the notion of spontaneous generation (the inexplicable appearance of worms in cheese, for example). Many natural philosophers used Bonnet’s pre-existing germs to account for peculiar facts of generation such as regener-ation of parts and the division of the polyp. A lost part in lower animals could reform from a germ for that part contained in the body without the need to appeal to self-active forces, which risked ascribing too much power to Nature and not enough to the Creator.
Perplexity over the polyp thus spread to many parts of educated


184 Emma Spary


European society. Natural historical phenomena were of intense interest to the wide and varied literate public. The philosophe Dide-rot produced a materialistic account of nature in his Pensées sur l’interpretation de la nature (‘Thoughts on the Interpretation of Nature’) of 1754, and suggested that human beings were them-selves composed of germs that acted together like a swarm of bees. In his Système de la nature (1756), the naturalist Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698-1759) criticized Bonnet’s generation and Newton’s' physics of attraction for failing to account for the purposeful arrangement of matter into living forms. Questions about generation and the nature of the soul were theologically problem-atic in the mid-eighteenth century, and simultaneously served to negotiate the validity of the Newtonian world-view.

Birth and breeding
The problem of inheritance had particular relevance for the Enlightened elite of French society. Many naturalists worked for or were themselves improving landowners; thus they had an acute interest in the formation and disappearance of races, the role played by different sexes in passing on traits, and the effects of environment upon offspring. It was still quite common for phys-icians to claim that monstrous children resulted from some shock or spectacle experienced by the mother before or after conception.9 The results of breeding experiments were widely disseminated during this period. Maupertuis, for example, carried out many years’ work on the inheritance of polydactyly; what interested him was not only the question of ‘heredity’, but the regularity in what had previously been explained as an accident of nature, something that occurred by chance and which therefore should not obey regular laws. The enlightened elite’s claims to social and intellec-tual superiority were increasingly related to the debate over whether such hierarchies were located inalterably in ancestry and anatomy or were local accidents of circumstance, and whether such accidents could be reversed or inherited.
Georges-Louis Leclerc, later comte de Buffon (1707-88) was also a committed Newtonian and a member of the Academy of Sciences when the polyp storm broke. During the late 1740s Buffon and the English naturalist John Turberville Needham observed the decomposition of seminal fluids into minute moving particles, con-cluding that all living beings were made of specific fundamental particles, the ‘organic molecules’.10 Inanimate and living beings did not merely possess different properties; the distinction between the living and non-living realms of nature commenced with the matter of which they were composed. Buffon and Daubenton’s widely read, multivolume Histoire naturelle (Paris, 1749-67) treated life as


Political, natural and bodily economies 185


the chief discontinuity in the natural order, a new view which came to be widely adopted.
For Buffon, problems of conformation and parental inheritance were explained by means of an internal mould, the moule intérieur. Attractive forces operated to move organic molecules to the moule intérieur from food ingested by the parent, thus generating new individuals. The cycle of life of a living being consisted of a series of stages; birth, growth, maturity, decline and death were all part of nature’s plan for the perpetuation of the species. This, Buffon argued, should be regarded as a succession of individuals descended from one another - in other words, as a succession of generative acts. Only thus could the species constitute a real entity in nature.11 Such concerns led to his programme of breeding experiments, designed to test where the limits of different species lay. He found, for example, that the wolf and the dog were one species.
Political economists and naturalists made explicit comparisons between the productivity of the earth and the productivity of the human race: both revealed the unfolding of Nature’s plan. Euro-pean natural history and debates about generation were not merely concerned with polyps; the naturalists were simultaneously writing natural histories of society. During the eighteenth century, a new field of social mathematics was developed to investigate changes in the population of nations, in order to determine how healthy - in moral and physical terms - that nation was. The foundation of this new mathematics of productivity of the population and of the soil was the calculus, the same mathematical instrument used by Buffon as the basis for his definition of the species. Correct use of the calculus allowed one to form predictions about future events through knowledge of a very large number of past events; thus medical problems such as the mortality rate of a population, and political problems such as that of fair voting procedure in elections, could all be studied by recourse to social mathematics. Buffon was among the first to utilize social mathematics as an instrument to generate inductive knowledge about the French population.
Generation, degeneration and regeneration
Following the discovery of the polyp, the Swiss naturalist and poly-math Albrecht von Haller (1708-77) explicitly rejected his earlier views of generation, and began to explain natural phenomena in terms of forces similar to Newton’s; he had written poetry in praise of the English natural philosopher. Above all, he was concerned to underline the primacy of God in controlling the formation of new individuals. Haller’s Pietist search for ways of proving God’s activity in the world led him to regard accounts of self-active forces


186 Emma Spary


operating in the body as tending towards self-active matter, whereas activity in the natural world should be ascribed to God. In 1752, in a preface to the second volume of his translation of the Histoire naturelle, Halier attacked Buffon’s claim that the internal mould could account for organization; the penetrating force which Buffon supposed to be organizing the organic mol-ecules would have to be purposive to get right all the millions of linkages in the body.12 In the 1750s Haller experimented on chicken eggs, sending his results to'Bonnet in Geneva. His work, published in Sur la formation du coeur dans le poulet (‘On the For-mation of the Heart in the Chicken’) (1757) showed that the struc-tures of the unborn chick were pre-existent in the membranes of the egg, before the approach of the male: organizing forces were not necessary.
In 1776 Buffon attacked Haller and Bonnet for attempting to prove the existence of God by means of arguments drawn from the design of living beings. ‘I only accuse them’, he said, ‘of preju-dice for their absurd system of pre-existing germs, a system which, despite its absurdity, may still last for a long time in the heads of those who imagine that it is linked with religion.’13 Buffon’s criti-cism reflected his opposition to a tradition of natural theology, most popular in England, by which the functions of the living body and of the economy of nature supplied direct evidence of Divine craftsmanship. Accounts of the natural world, for the French, must be based only upon the knowledge which was directly accessible to the senses; accounts of physical nature must be given in terms of physical laws. However, this meant that it was hard for French naturalists to ensure that their accounts of the world were not perceived as materialist or atheist; as Wood’s essay shows, Buffon was not immune to such charges. Peers regarded such writers as failing to uphold their responsibility to improve public morals, for naturalists’ accounts of the operation of the animal world were simultaneously claims about the best course of action for particular societies and for the human race as a whole.
The expert knowledge that naturalists were perceived to have about the living world made them valuable public servants. The most renowned European naturalists - Banks, Buffon, Haller, Lin-naeus - served as consultants to the Crown in agricultural and medical matters. Vast sums of money were involved in colonial trade, for individual and State alike; thus naturalists’ discussions about economies were highly political. They could contribute to the growing imperialism of European nations through controlling the movement of new species into and out of centres of natural history. They could, through their expertise in the internal econ-omies of animals and plants, work to ensure the success of new


Political, natural and bodily economies


187


endeavours at cultivation and breeding in the colonies and in the central gardens, parks and farms of Europe; this was a process which continued well into the nineteenth century and reached its peak during that time.14 However, there was another sense in which knowledge of the animal economy had political implications. Naturalists accounted for the stability of the natural world - the ability of species to perpetuate themselves indefinitely through suc-cessive generations. They accounted for the maintenance of the balance of nature by treating the natural economy in the same way as the political one; but they were also faced with the problem of accounting for the changes that they saw in the world.
This was a problem common to natural and civil historians alike. Civil historians such as Edward Gibbon (1737-94) and political economists such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-72) - and the two roles were not easily distinguishable - were deeply concerned with the ways in which nations became civilized and enlightened, or fell into decline and degradation.15 Until the mid-century many historians, natural and civil, regarded history as a balanced, but cyclical, process: nations would rise from barbarism to a state of enlightenment and the pursuit of the sciences and arts, but inevi-tably, with increasing civilization, there would be increasing cor-ruption of morals, leading to an inescapable decline and fall.
The concerns of naturalists with the physical history of animals and man reflected this concern with degeneration. Buffon regarded non-whites, for example, as having degraded from an original per-fection - the European type. This was the consequence of gener-ations of people having been exposed to the deleterious effects of a hot climate. Local climatic conditions and food were the two principal causes of degeneration. Inorganic particles were assimi-lated into living bodies from their surroundings, destroyed the per-fection of the form that the species had received at origin, thereby affecting its moral and physical nature, sometimes irreversibly.16 In the context of the expansion of European colonial holdings after 1750, this fear of changing climate had an almost mythical reson-ance in the travel accounts consumed by an eager readership during this period.
Following the writings of the agronomes, in France and to a lesser extent in England, several political commentators (including the permanent secretary of the Paris Academy of Sciences, the marquis de Condorcet) began to suggest that society might be infinitely perfectible, and that the necessary decline into barbarism might be avoidable.17 This was possible for man because, unlike the animals, he possessed the power of reason - the power to develop the arts and sciences - by means of which he might improve himself both physically and morally. Practitioners of the sciences endeavoured to make themselves into expert dispensers of


i88 Emma Spary


human regeneration, fighting against the gradual decline of nature. The growing interest of naturalists towards the end of the century in studying other human races was also symptomatic of a view of the history of the human species as a process of perfection in per-manent tension with a natural tendency to degenerate.
For nearly half a century Buffon experimented on the limits of degeneration through bad food, heat and other natural influences, such as electricity. Meanwhile, trials by his colleague Daubenton during the 1760s suggested that cross-breeding could improve degenerate animals within the space of one or two generations. The extent to which animals and, by implication, man, could be changed through different breeding choices excited considerable interest, particularly in France, at the very end of the eighteenth century. Apparently Buffon carried out breeding experiments among the peasants on his estate by arranging marriages between them, to see if he could regenerate them: this practice was not popular with the peasants!
Scales of being
Concerns about orders of perfection were characteristically expressed in classificatory schemes. In 1774 Buffon gave per-mission for a young botanist, Antoine-Laurent de Jussieu (1748— 1836), to reorder the plants in the Jardin du Roi according to his uncle Bernard’s natural method of classification. Jussieu based his new order on the external marks of internal function - the indi-cators of the vegetable economy. He ordered genera and species in a hierarchy of physical complexity and perfection: the most perfect species, such as trees, came at the head of the plant kingdom and the least perfect ones, such as fungi, at the bottom of the series. ‘Perfection’ was thus defined on the basis of the complexity of the functions exhibited by the body of the being. This notion of a scale of being was derived from the classics; in different versions, it was to be found in the writings of many eighteenth-century naturalists. Jussieu’s method, however, published in Genera plantarum (Paris, 1789), revealed a comparatively new concern for classifying by function; similar views were shared by zoologists like Félix Vicq d’Azyr (1748-94), Daubenton’s student. For these naturalists, a ‘natural’ classification was one that expressed the structural and functional relationships which bodies exhibited as a consequence of possessing life.
Anatomy had not achieved the same recognition as botany in eighteenth-century Europe, in part because of its lack of appeal for an aristocratic audience compared to the widely popularized charm of flowers. Linnaeus had classified animals by using outer parts such as the teeth and feet. From the 1740s, however,


Political, natural and bodily economies 189


Daubenton, Haller and others stressed the value of internal parts as the basis for investigation of the true nature of animals and man. Daubenton’s programme of comparative anatomy allowed the com-parison of animal species with the well-known anatomy of man to reveal the degree of perfection of each species. Thus it would be possible to establish a degenerative series of animal species based on complexity of function.
Vicq d’Azyr’s Traité d'anatomie et de physiologie (1786) utilized the faculties of the animal economy to demarcate1 the boundaries of animal classificatory groups, as had Daubenton. Vicq also indicated his debt to a new science of the animal economy devel-oped by Haller in the 1740s and 1750s - a science Haller called physiology, literally ‘laws of nature’. Its object was to study the processes by which the presence of life in animals and plants was indicated; everything, in fact, that set the living world apart from the non-living - locomotion, sensation, irritability, respiration, nutrition and generation. By the 1780s those functions were of cen-tral interest to naturalists across Europe in their attempts to order the natural world, although there was very little agreement among naturalists as to the nature of the principles acting in animals and plants. Investigating the bodily economy, therefore, raised ques-tions about how far living beings were subject to mechanical laws, and how specific forces of life, if they existed, operated within the body. Studies of these principles contributed to the ordering of living beings in a hierarchy of complexity. But they also contrib-uted to a wider account of the relationship between man and the world, and of the degree of autonomy possessed by nature. The location and nature of the will in voluntary movements was central to such debates, since the nature of the will defined the limits of bodily autonomy. Contemporary discourses about the location of political authority similarly revolved around the question of whether political will and authority naturally came from above (the monarch, the parliament, God, the church, the ruling educated elites) or from below (the people). In particular, the debate over the materialism of the soul, which divided natural philosophers and natural historians throughout eighteenth-century Europe, brought the question of the relationship between mind and body to the forefront of concern, since, as La Mettrie put it, ‘the differ-ent states of the soul are . . . always co-relative to the states of the body’.18

Sensibility and structure
The eighteenth-century term ‘sensibility’ was used in several con-texts to describe the ability to feel. In natural history, sensibility was a characteristic of more organized animals. In ‘On the Sensible


190 Emma Spary


i


Figure 11.3 ‘Changing a quadruped into man’. From P. Camper, Oeuvres (Paris, 1803), Atlas, plate 33: accompanying the second ‘Discours sur l’analogie qu’il y a entre la structure du corps humain et celle des quadrupèdes, des oiseaux et des poissons’.



and Irritable Parts of the Human Body’ (1752), Haller dis-tinguished between the qualities of irritability and sensibility. Irritability was an innate property in muscles, independent of the will, which was experimentally demonstrable. Sensibility, on the other hand, related to properties of animal bodies that were con-trolled by the will; but it, too, resided in the fabric of the animal body. These views were partly a response to the work of the Edin-burgh physician Robert Whytt (1714-66), whose An Essay on the


Political, natural and bodily economies 191


Vital and Other Involuntary Motions of Animals (1751) had sug-gested that the soul, coextensive with the fabric of the body, was the direct source of voluntary movement. Haller sought a physical cause for these natural phenomena; but he also objected to the materialist positions that he saw Whytt, La Mettrie and others adopting. God, the prime mover of matter, had placed attractive forces such as irritability and gravity in matter and none of these were self-directing. Their acerbic debate prompted an anonymous Edinburgh student to comment that apparently ‘neither Baron Haller nor Dr. Whytt were deficient in irritability’.19
Vicq d’Azyr, like many others, drew a close connection between function, organization and degree of perfection. In a series of detailed dissections depicted in the Traité, Vicq showed that the degree of sensibility an animal possessed was related to its brain structure and to the degree of complexity of the nervous system.20 Unlike Vicq, the Dutch anatomist Petrus Camper (1722-89) made explicit connections between the anatomical structure of different species of animal or human races and their moral qualities, a stan-dard concern in this period.21 The relation of physical structure to moral qualities was not merely of interest to naturalists. Travel accounts, medical writings, discussions of gender differences and books on etiquette all evidenced similar concerns. The revival of an ancient art, physiognomy, by a Swiss pastor, Caspar Friedrich Lavater, in the 1760s and 1770s marked the start of a craze for physiognomical portraits which swept the fashionable streets of Europe. Physiognomists could predict moral character from an observation of the facial structure; the examples given in physiog-nomical guides, however, clearly show that class, gender and con-text were highly important elements in assessing an individual’s virtues and vices.
The term ‘sensibility’ was also increasingly being used to describe human feelings and responses in a more narrowly defined way - people with a greater sensibility were those who had stronger feelings, particularly in love, friendship or when reading the romantic novels which became popular at the end of the century, such as Rousseau’s La Nouvelle Hélo.se (1758).22 Simultaneously, the sensitive plant, Mimosa pudica, attracted much interest from European naturalists seeking to establish the site of feeling, intel-lect and imagination. It also fuelled the accounts of Romantic poets like Coleridge, Shelley and Wordsworth in their writing on sensi-bility. In his Botanic Garden (1794), Erasmus Darwin ascribed per-ception, sensation and volition to plants, for how else, he argued, could plant sex organs know how and where to find their mates? What directed them must be a ‘sensation of love’.23
The language of sensibility in the late eighteenth century - especially when using animals and plants as an example - was used


Emma Spary

---------:---->'

Figure ii .4 Frontispiece to J. de Vaticanson, An Account of the Mechanism of an Automaton. Translated out of the French Original, By J. T. Desaguliers (London, 1742). These automata were first exhibited in Paris in the 1730s, as part of Vaucanson’s hugely popular touring show. They could well have served as models for La Mettrie’s notion of the ‘man-machine’. Automata, popular throughout the eighteenth century, performed human acts such as speaking and writing, and some were made to pronounce political statements. Revolutionary political writers warned their audiences of the dangers of becoming automata through sacrificing their autonomy to despotic rulers.



to describe, discuss and legislate about human sexual behaviour in a society for which the role of the Church was increasingly uncer-tain. But studying the moral qualities of man and animals was more than just a way of discussing individual human relationships. It could also provide naturalists with a means to comment upon the processes underlying the ‘proper’ operation of human society as a whole. Like other naturalists, Daubenton discussed animal behaviour in human terms: ‘The hamster is of a singular ferocity and an astonishing courage for its size ... It seems to have no other passions than that of anger which leads it to attack everything in its path, without paying attention to the superiority of the


Political, natural and bodily economies 193

3 : :--------------------------------



enemy’s forces’.24 Such descriptions reveal the great political power of natural history in the eighteenth century: since it was so widely accepted that animals could serve as an example of what ‘natural man’ would be like, claims about natural government made by expert naturalists were important claims that could not be dismis-sed lightly. The structure of eighteenth-century government was frequently compared by historians, rulers and political economists to that of the family; and naturalists also couched normative claims about family life in discussions of how animals conducted their domestic existence. Many political commentators argued that exhi-biting sensibility was a perfect way for statesmen and public figures to prove that they were fit to govern, by demonstrating in public that they were not so corrupt as to have lost touch with their natu-ral feelings. Those concerned with the problems of ordering people in society thus drew upon natural historical and medical discourses about the body. Natural history, in particular, depended for its

Figure 11.5 ‘Gross brutality, rudeness, force, stupidity, inflexible obstinacy, with a total want of tenderness and sensibility’. From J.-C. Lavater, Essays on Physiognomy, trans. Henry Hunter, 3 vols. (London, 1789-98), Vol. II, p. 108. The great fear of the eighteenth-century elite was that of degenerating from humanity to bestiality, as this quote accompanying the ‘caricatures of men forced into a resemblance to the ox’ reveals.


194 Emma Spary


success on its romantic appeal to a public which did not draw boundaries between nature and human experience of it.
Social, sexual and racial differences were mediated in natural historical and medical texts by recourse to anatomical accounts of structural difference. Writers such as La Mettrie stressed the rela-tive strength of the nerve fibres of men and women as the cause of their differences. The swifter motion of nervous fluid in women’s bodies rendered their sensibility greater, their sensory impressions more vivid and their thoughts more fleeting and incon-sequential. Thus they were regarded as less intelligent and fitted only for certain sorts of activity, usually domestic and family- based.25 By the 1780s and 1790s most physicians and anatomists gave accounts of the operations of the bodily economy in terms of the circulation of subtle fluids identical to, or analogous to, elec-tricity, magnetism and gravity. For the botanist Antoine-Laurent de Jussieu, the circulating principle was electricity: it formed the link between the natural economy, the productivity of the popu-lation of France and of French soil, and the individual moral and physical lives of French men and women. This fluid was also the cause of all sensation, hence the ultimate cause of character forma-tion and of the customs and degree of civilization of different nations.
By the time of the French Revolution, concerns about de- and regeneration were associated with a view of the living body as extremely malleable in its functions: as subject to change in response to external conditions and internal will. In England, the Dissenter and Royal Society chemist Joseph Priestley showed through a series of experiments in the 1770s that plants had the power to purify the air of the poisons with which animals cor-rupted it.26 This, he said, was proof of the fact that God had designed even plants to have an important role in the natural econ-omy. The economy of the living body thus formed a small part of a greater cycle of generation, degeneration and regeneration through which nature’s economy was balanced.27
Conclusion
By the end of the eighteenth century, naturalists managing insti-tutions throughout Europe had established themselves as the experts in collection, classification, cultivation and breeding, cater-ing to a wealthy and enthusiastic public and to the increasingly imperialist aims of European governments. Many of them, such as Buffon and Banks, had risen to the upper echelons of European elite society through their efforts in these areas. Their increasing ability to present themselves as expert mediators between nature and society allowed them to work on the boundary between the


Political, natural and bodily economies 195


social and the natural worlds. Besides their power to comment upon the political state of nations, , naturalists in late eighteenth- century Europe began to make increasingly rigorous claims about the ways in which women and other social groups ought to behave, based on the observation of their structure - claims which are still widespread in our society today.
Observing structure and controlling economies conferred a great deal of political and social power, allowing naturalists to make order in the social, as well as the natural, world. Increasingly, towards the end of the century, justifications for social, racial and gender hierarchies were located within the fabric of the body itself. The debate over natural and bodily economies was political, because it was a debate over the location of proper government: how far natural and bodily change /could occur from within, and how far such changes represented a divergence from an original or potential perfection. Late eighteenth-century French natural his-tory, by enclosing the bodily, political and moral economies within the economy of nature, would become central to Revolutionary policies of universal regeneration.

Further reading
Bowler, Peter, The Fontana History of the Environmental Sciences (London, 1992).
Chisick,. Harvey, The Limits of Reform in the Enlightenment: Attitudes Towards the Education of the Lower Classes in Eighteenth-Century France (Princeton, 1984).
Cross, Stephen J., ‘John Hunter, the animal oeconomy, and late eight-, eenth-century physiological discourse’, Studies in the History of Biology,
5 (1981), pp. i-lio.
Darnton, Robert, Mesmerism and the End of the Enlightenment in France (Cambridge, MA, 1968).
Gasking, Elizabeth, Investigations into Generation, 1651-1828 (London, 1967).
Heckmann, Herbert, Die andere Sch.pfung. Geschichte der frühen Automaten in Wirklichkeit und Dichtung (Frankfurt am Main, 1982).
Jordanova, Ludmilla and Porter, Roy (eds.), Images of the Earth: Essays in the History of the Environmental Sciences (Chalfont St Giles, 1979).
Lenhoff, Sylvia G., Hydra and the Birth of Experimental Biology, 1744: Abraham Trembley’s Mémoires Concerning the Polyps (Pacific Grove, CA, 1986).
Porter, Roy, ‘Making faces: physiognomy and fashion in eighteenth- century England’, Etudes Anglaises, 4 (1985), pp. 385-96.
Spary, Emma, ‘Making the natural order: The Paris Jardin du Roi, 1750- 1795’, Ph.D. dissertation (Cambridge, 1993), ch. 2.
Walker, W. Cameron, ‘Animal electricity before Galvani’, Annals of Science, 2 (1937), pp. 84-113.


196 Emma Spary


-j-

Wellman, Katherine, La Mettrie: Medicine, Philosophy and Enlightenment (Durham, NC, 1992).
Weullersse, Georges, Le Mouvement physiocratique en France de 1756 & 1770 (Paris, 1910).
Williams, Elizabeth A., The Physical and the Moral: Anthropology, Physi-ology, and Philosophical Medicine in France, 1750-18so (Cambridge, 1994)-




PAUL B. WOOD

12 The science of man

If nothing else, the spate of publications marking the quincen-tenary of Columbus’s landfall in the Americas reminds us that the intellectual revolution which occurred in early modern Europe involved more than just a change in cosmology. For,too long, historians of science have focused their attention almost exclusively on the ‘birth of a new physics’, and have largely ignored the equally profound transformation of European conceptions of human nature prompted by the discovery of hitherto unknown lands and peoples across the seas. Visions of humankind derived from the Bible and from antiquity were gradually destablized by a growing literature which chronicled the natural and civil histories of Asia and the Americas. Through these texts, Europeans learned of peoples whose appearance, customs, and beliefs were radically different from their own, and the information thus compiled chal-lenged not only traditional views concerning man’s physical nature, but also widely held assumptions about morality, politics, and religion. Arguably, therefore, a revolution in the human sciences took place during the ‘long eighteenth century’ in Europe which rivalled that which shook the physical sciences in the period. In what follows, I shall trace some of the consequences of this momentous refashioning of European images of humankind through a discussion of the relationships between natural history and the science of man in the Scottish Enlightenment.1
The Baconian legacy
Given the almost Biblical status of Sir Francis Bacon’s writings in eighteenth-century Scotland, it is significant that in his Advance-ment of Learning (1605) and De augmenlis scientiarum (1623) Bacon (1561-1626) incorporated the classification and description of human character types in the branch of learning he christened ‘the culture of the mind’. Furthermore, in the brief tract Parasceve, appended to the Novum organum (1620), Bacon catalogued the vari-ous natural histories which he thought were requisite for a firm empirical foundation for his inductive philosophy, and he called for histories of the individual human senses, the passions, and the

197



198 Paul B. Wood


faculties of the mind. In Bacon’s works the science of the human mind thus takes on an important natural historical dimension, and his methodological message was taken up by a number of leading Scots.
During his student days, the physician John Gregory (1724-73) outlined a plan for the founding of a society dedicated to the pur-suit of medical enquiries according to ‘the strict method of naturall history & accurate induction from it’ set out by Bacon. Among the subjects to which he thought the proposed society should devote itself, Gregory included natural histories ‘of the Senses & the method of preserving & improving them’ and of the faculties of the human mind. Significantly, he stressed the value of com-parative evidence drawn from the animal kingdom for such enquir-ies, as he called for ‘A Naturall history of such Animals & such parts of nature as by their anatomy, constitutions, diseases & instincts can throw any light on’ humankind. But one of the ‘desiderata’ of medicine he listed stands out, not least because it attests to his indebtedness to Bacon’s De augmentis scientiarum. Under the heading ‘Desideratum] 4’ Gregory wrote ‘History of the connexion between the mind & the body & their mutuall effects in producing & curing one anothers diseases. This comprehends the effects of imagination, music &c in the production & cure of dis-eases & the manner of operating upon & changing the faculties of the mind by medicines’.2 In Book IV of the De augmentis, Bacon too recommended the study of ‘the bond and connexion between the mind and body’, which for him encompassed physiognomy, the interpretations of dreams, the discovery of the effects of the body on the mind, and the tracing of the influence of the passions and imagination on the body. There can be little doubt that Gre-gory took his inspiration from Bacon’s remarks, especially as it was in Book IV of the De augmentis that Bacon discussed improvements to the art of medicine. Gregory therefore drew on Bacon’s metho-dological legacy to develop a natural historical and comparative method which incorporated the investigation of both body and mind, along with their interconnections.
Gregory’s early interests and approach later bore fruit in his A Comparative View of the State and Faculties of Man with those of the Animal World (1765), wherein he championed the comparative approach to the study of the human mind. Gregory contended that one of the major obstacles to progress in this branch of knowledge had been the mistaken belief that there was no analogy between the constitution of man and that of animals; because nature was one continuous chain, he argued, ‘no one link of the great chain can be perfectly understood, without the knowledge, at least, of the links that are nearest to it’. Consequently, he urged the legit-imacy of juxtaposing not only the physiology of man and animals,


The science of man 199
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------i:
but also their ‘states and manner of life’.3 For Gregory, the main
principle of action common to man and animals was instinct. He
maintained that within their proper limits man’s instincts were ‘a
sure and infallible guide’ (p. 15), but he thought that life in civil-
ized societies had rendered them corrupt. Hence he believed that
in order to determine the natural operations of instinct, man in
his savage state had to be studied, along with wild and domesti-
cated animals. What differentiated humankind from the beasts,
according to Gregory, was the superiority of human reason, our
moral sense, and our enjoyment of the various pleasures of the
mind derived from curiosity, the pursuit of the sciences, and the
appreciation of the fine arts. While each of these was liable to cor-
ruption, Gregory nevertheless affirmed that these faculties of the
mind gave humankind its greatest advantages over animals, namely / . .
religion, taste, and life in society.
Gregory also proposed a radical widening of the scope of physi-ology, which reflected both his belief in a unified science of man and his debt to Bacon. In his Lectures on the Duties and Qualifi-cations of a Physician (1772), he stated that it ‘belonged] to physi-ology to enquire into the laws of the union between the mind and the body; into the effects of culture and education upon the consti-tution [and] into the power of habit, the effects of enthusiasm, and [the] force of imagination’ (p. 79). For Gregory, physiology was thus not concerned simply with the animal oeconomy of the body treated as a self-contained, fixed system; rather, it focused on the dynamic interactions of body, mind, society, and environment.
Gregory also specified in some detail what he thought was encom-passed by the study of the mutual influence of mind and body. His list of topics included natural histories of the power of imagination, enthusiasm, dreams, custom and habit, the effects of the fine arts on the mind and body, language, and our capacity to imitate others. This indicates that he regarded the study of the relations between mind and body to be essentially a natural historical one, and that Bacon was the primary inspiration for his approach to this subject. Gregory thus propagated a Baconian vision of the sci-ence of the mind, and in so doing he helped to popularize the natural history of man, which he regarded as ‘a more interesting subject . . . affording] a larger scope for the display of genius, than any other branch of natural history’ (p. 218).
One the most interesting Scottish examples of the use of the Baconian natural historical method in the science of man is a pair of discourses delivered before the Aberdeen Philosophical Society in 1758 and 1760 by Gregory’s associate, the physician and natural-ist David Skene. Skene took as his starting point Bacon’s dis-cussion in the De augmentis of the proper subject matter of natural history and the philosophy of mind, but argued that Bacon had


200 Paul B. Wood


mistakenly excluded the human mind from the works of nature, and hence from the province of natural history.4 Skene maintained that the mind was ‘as truely a Natural Production as the Human Body’, having ‘its own particular Constitution . . . compounded of distinct principles united in various degrees, which have their origin, progress & decline’. Consequently, he urged that the human mind was a legitimate object of natural historical enquiry. Skene proposed that the ‘first grand division of Natural History should be into that of Mind & that of Matter’, and he rec-ommended that the natural history of the mind should encompass ‘all the facts relative to the Structure or Anatomy of the Mind & the Combinations of its several Principles’.5
Skene then divided the natural history of the human mind into two main branches: the ‘Abstract Philosophy of the Mind’ or meta-physics, and the ‘Philosophy of Life & Manners’. In the first, the mind was conceived of ‘as an extensive Genus of Beings endued with certain Powers & faculties, which are in some degree common to every one of the Species’ and, according to Skene, the aim of metaphysics was to ‘investigate these powers & their laws of Oper-ation’ by means of introspection. In the second branch, Skene stipulated that the faculties of the mind ‘are considered as they are found existing in individuals . . . [and] Man is contemplated not only as a rational, but a social! active being’. Here the aim was to discover ‘a just & accurate picture of Human Nature’, and to delineate ‘a set of Characters engag’d in various important trans-actions, which are faithfully recorded & their Causes & Conse-quences justly deduc’d’. Echoing Bacon, Skene argued that the natural historian can identify and classify fixed human character types by turning to history, biography, plays, novels, and the pages of the periodical press for his evidence.6 Skene’s application of the natural historical method to the science of man was thus both highly innovative and thoroughgoing, and his scheme for the study of the mind clearly reflects his preoccupations as a practical naturalist, for he was acutely aware of the problems of classification and systematic arrangement.7
In the Scottish Enlightenment Bacon’s ideas served to legitimize academic as well as methodological reforms, as can be seen in Alexander Gerard’s [A] Plan of Education in the Marischal College and University (1755), which served as an apologia for the restruc-turing of the arts curriculum carried out by the college in 1753- Gerard (1728-95) here cited Bacon’s requirement that the study of natural histories should precede the use of the inductive method to justify the relegation of logic from the first to the third and final year of the new philosophy course. Gerard insisted that logic was ‘one of the most abstruse and difficult branches of Philosophy, and


The science of man 201


therefore quite improper to begin with’. Instead, students had to be acquainted first with the natural history of the mind; Gerard wrote that ‘[t]he natural history of the human understanding must be known, and its phaenomena discovered; for without this, the exertions of the intellectual faculties, and their application to the various subjects of science will be unintelligible’ (p. 9). In his defence of the reformed curriculum, Gerard thus followed Bacon in calling for a natural historical foundation for the science of the mind, and he expounded a similar methodological message in the moral philosophy lectures he delivered at Marischal during his tenure of the Chair from 1752 until 1759.8 Indeed, for much of the eighteenth century it was something of a methodological com-monplace at Marischal to conceive of moral philosophy as having a natural historical dimension, and we shall see that Gerard’s views were echoed by other Scottish moralists.
Another feature of the Baconian legacy which had important consequences for the natural history of man in the Scottish Enlight-enment was Bacon’s treatment of the various branches of history in his scheme of human knowledge. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the boundaries between civil and natural history were redrawn in such works as the Spanish Jesuit José de Acosta’s The Naturall and Morall History of the East and West Indies (orig. 1590; 1604). Bacon evidently endorsed Acosta’s practice, for in his De augmentis scientiarum he classed together natural and civil history on the grounds that these two branches of learning were ultimately rooted in the faculty of memory. Well into the eighteenth century, the concerns of British virtuosi reflected the close connections envisaged by Bacon between these two branches of history, insofar as they commonly engaged in the collection of both antiquities and specimens from the three kingdoms of nature.9 Within the Scottish universities, Bacon’s map of the sciences was embodied insti-tutionally at Aberdeen, where civil and natural history were taught together in the first year of the philosophy course following the curriculum reforms of 1753 at King’s and Marischal Colleges.10 Moreover, the various museums set up in the Scottish universities during the eighteenth century resembled the cabinets of the virtuosi in their juxtaposition of natural historical specimens with ethnographic materials, coins, and antiquities.11 Thus enlightened Scots saw a fundamental continuity between civil and natural his-tory, and it is arguable that it was their Baconian vision of the structure of human knowledge which in part led writers like Henry Home, Lord Karnes, and Adam Ferguson to regard their histories of society as being natural histories of man in his social state.


202 Paul B. Wood


John Locke and the natural history of the mind
In his An Essay concerning Human Understanding (1690), John Locke (1632-1704) self-consciously adopted an ‘Historical plain Method’ in dealing with ‘the discerning Faculties of . . . Man’, and in Book II of the Essay he claimed to have ‘given a short, and . . . true History of the first beginnings of Humane Knowledge’ .12 Hence Locke was primarily concerned with the classification and description of our ideas, of the powers of the mind, and of the epistemic status of our beliefs, though it should be recognized that he also chronicled the temporal history of the human mind, insofar as he reconstructed the genesis of our ideas and the progressive development of our intellectual faculties. With this shift to the natural historical mode came a more systematic appeal to comparative evidence. Because he rejected the Cartesian view that beasts were mere machines, Locke compared the operations of the human mind with those of the higher animals in order to ascertain the precise differences between them. He also considered the mental states of idiots and madmen in an effort to illuminate the normal functioning of the mind. Finally, Locke cited the evidence of the ‘whole course of Men in their several Ages, Countries, and Educations’ in support of his ‘history’ of the human mind, and he invoked the evidence of language to illustrate how the mind oper-ates.13 Locke thereby offered a means of transcending the limi-tations of the introspective method, and opened up new perspec-tives on history, anthropology, and the comparative study of languages which were to be explored by enlightened savants in Scotland and elsewhere during the eighteenth century.
Locke’s natural history of the mind proved to be controversial in the decades following the publication of the Essay. For example, in his Lettres philosophiques (1732), Fran.ois-Marie Arouet de Vol-taire remarked that ‘after so many deep thinkers had fashioned the romance of the soul, there came a wise man who modestly recounted its history: Locke has unfolded to man the nature of human reason as a fine anatomist explains the powers of the body’.14 D’Alembert later echoed Voltaire’s enthusiasm, but read-ers such as the Oxford logician Edward Bentham criticized Locke (and others) for devoting too much attention to the analysis of the ‘nature of our Souls, our Sensations, our Passions and Prejudices’, which Bentham claimed was more properly ‘a part of the natural History of Man, rather than a part of Logick’.15
Scottish thinkers, however, tended to endorse Voltaire’s assess-ment, and emulated Locke’s methodological example. For example, William Duncan (who taught at Marischal College from 1752 until his death in 1760) wrote in his highly influential


The science of man 203


i----------------------------------------------------:----------------------------------

Elements of Logick (1748) that the science of logic ‘may be justly stiled the History of the human Mind’ (p. 4), and his fellow Aber-donian Thomas Reid (1710-96) likewise assumed the Lockean role of the natural historian of the mind in his classes at King’s College, Aberdeen. In an outline of his philosophy course dating from 1752, he described his pneumatology lectures as constituting ‘the History of the Human Mind and its Operations & Powers’, and Reid later discussed the methodological problems involved in attempting to chart such a history in the introduction to his An Inquiry into the Human Mind, on the Principles of Common Sense (1764). Reid urged the need for an accurate ‘anatomy of the mind’, which would exhi-bit the original powers, perceptions, and notions of the ‘thinking principle’ within us. Yet he recognized that mere introspection could no; reveal these powers and perceptions, since ‘before we are capable of reflection, they are so mixed, compounded and decompounded, by habits, associations and abstractions, that it is hard to know what they were originally’ (p. 10). Consequently, he maintained that we must analyse the mind, in order to enumerate ‘the original powers and laws of our constitution’ and to explain ‘the various phenomena of human nature’ (p. 12). Thus Reid’s projected anatomy of the mind, as sketched in the Inquiry, can be seen as a fusion of the description and classification of the ‘furni-ture of the human understanding’ (p. 528) with Newton’s method of analysis.
It is arguable too that Reid deployed a natural historical approach in the lengthy third essay of his Essays on the Active Powers of Man (1785), wherein he catalogued the different ‘prin-ciples of action’ of the human mind. Earlier in the century, British philosophers like George Turnbull (who taught Reid at Marischal College in the 1720s) and Bishop Joseph Butler (whom Reid read closely at a formative stage in his intellectual development), rou-tinely combined the perspectives of the moralist and the natural historian.16 Reid’s classification of the various principles of action and his use of evidence drawn from the animal kingdom to illus-trate the workings of those principles shared by man and beast was similar to that of his predecessors, although it must be said that Reid’s utilization of such evidence was much more systematic.
Outside of Aberdeen, one Scot who might profitably be seen in this Lockean context is David Hume (1711-76), who, like Reid, conceived of himself as an ‘anatomist of the mind’. While most scholars tend to regard Hume’s remarks in the introduction to the Treatise of Human Nature (3 vols., 1739-40) concerning the use of the experimental method in the science of man as the statement of his methodological principles, Hume’s comments on the analysis of the mind in the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748) are no less revealing. He argued that, because of the limits of


204 Paul B. Wood


introspection, it is very difficult to distinguish between the various operations and powers of the human mind, and consequently recommended that we should endeavour to classify accurately our mental faculties. It may be that Hume’s methodological statements in the Enquiry reflect his adoption of the natural historical approach exemplified in Locke’s Essay, if so, his The Natural His-tory of Religion (1757) can be seen (in part) as a product of this approach.17
The French connection
Like the works of other naturalists, Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon’s Histoire naturelle (1749-1804) served as a fund of fac-tual information about the various modes of life of the human spe-cies in different parts of the globe and about mankind’s place in the animal kingdom. But Buffon’s theoretical interpretations of the facts found less favour. One particularly contentious aspect of the Histoire was his account of racial differences. Echoing the Baron Montesquieu’s famous dictum that the ‘empire of climate is the first of all empires’, Buffon maintained that climatic influences were responsible for the production of racial types and for what he considered to be the degenerate state of the flora and fauna of the New World.18 Following Hume’s critique of Montesquieu in ‘Of National Characters’ (1748), Scottish men of letters sought to counter Buffon’s theory of race by appealing to ‘moral’ causes of variation such as the state of society . Thus Lord Karnes argued that differences in national or racial temperaments were attribu-table primarily to social factors. Yet Karnes also contended that God was the only cause powerful enough to produce the physical differences among human races, and hence asserted each race had been specially created. However, Karnes’s idiosyncratic theory was no more acceptable to his contemporaries than than that of Buffon, and his speculations sparked off a heated debate which saw his opponents trying to steer a safe passage between the Scylla of environmental determinism and the Charybdis of polygenism, not least because they saw Karnes’s ideas as subverting the foundations of religion and morality.19
The Scots were equally critical of other parts of the Histoire. Writing to the fledgling Edinburgh Review, Adam Smith (1723-90) praised Buffon’s style but dismissed his explanations of ‘the forma-tion of plants, the generation of animals, the formation of the foetus, [and] the development of the senses’ as being ‘almost entirely hypothetical’ and occasionally unintelligible.20 Although Smith seems not to have been apprehensive about the implications of Buffon’s hypotheses, the Aberdonians Thomas Reid, Robert Eden Scott (1770-1811), and the natural historian James Beattie


The science of man 205


were highly critical of his ideas, for they perceived in the Histoire hints of atheism and materialism.2’ Such concerns notwithstanding, Reid, Scott, and Beattie were in different ways indebted to the Histoire for empirical information about humankind and the animal kingdom, as were many of their Scottish contemporaries. In a simi-lar vein, Adam Smith incorporated data from Linnaeus’ Systema naturae (1735), as well as his own field observations, in his essay on the human senses published posthumously in 1795.22
But the Scottish moralists were indebted to natural historians for more than just their ‘facts’. Adam Ferguson’s whole approach to the study of man and society was grounded in the methods of the natural historians. In his moral philosophy lectures, Ferguson (1723-1816) insisted that ‘before we can ascertain rules of morality for mankind, the history of man’s nature, his dispositions, his specific enjoyments, and sufferings, his condition and future pros-pects, should be known’.23 Consequently, he believed that moral philosophy should be based on ‘Pneumatics, or the physical history of mind’, which he divided into the history of the species and the history of the individual, the former encompassing the description of man’s physical nature as well as the modes of man’s social and political existence, and the latter the description of the faculties and powers of the mind (pp. 15-16). Ferguson likewise identified himself as a natural historian of man in his An Essay on the History of Civil Society (1767), a work which was clearly intended as a con-tribution to the history of the human species. Ferguson invoked the methodological practices of natural history, and criticized the theories of the state of nature advanced by Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau on the grounds that they had substituted hypotheses for historical facts. Ferguson insisted that their methods of reasoning were illicit, and argued that our notions of human nature should be based solely on the historical record which, he claimed, demonstrated that man is naturally a sociable animal.
Ferguson’s natural historical view of man received its fullest exposition in the revised and enlarged version of his lectures pub-lished in 1792. Even though Ferguson distinguished between the history of man and the science of morals, he nonetheless reiterated his conviction that the former served as the foundation for the latter.24 Consequently, as a basis for his review of the principles of politics and morals he outlined fairly detailed histories of both the human species and the human mind, in which he traced anal-ogies between man and the rest of the animal kingdom, while at the same time emphasizing man’s uniqueness as a self-conscious, purposive being. Ferguson also underlined the necessity of compil-ing such histories, for he maintained that introspection had to be coupled with the history of the species ‘as it may be observed by


2o6 Paul B. Wood




Figure 12.i John Kay’s caricature of Lord Karnes, the advocate and historian Hugo Arnot, and Lord Monboddo.

any indifferent spectator’ in order to reveal the secrets of human nature (vol. I, p. 49). Moreover, he explicitly recommended the use of the descriptive and classificatory methods of the natural his-torian in the science of the mind. According to Ferguson, the mind was no different from any other constituent of the creation when considered ‘historically’, and its operations could be classified in much the same way as any other natural object. Thus, while Fer-guson may have been a moral preacher in the classroom, we should not neglect the fact that in both his lectures and his published works he also regarded himself as a natural historian of human nature, and saw moral philosophy as being rooted in the natural history of man.
Like Ferguson, John Millar (1735-1801), Lord Karnes (1696- 1782) and James Dunbar (d.1798) all saw themselves as contribu-ting to the ‘history of the species’. Millar stated that his work on the origin of rank in civil society was ‘intended to illustrate the natural history of mankind in several important articles’, and he made adroit use of the four stages theory of history to classify the types of human societies discernible in the annals of history and the accounts of travellers.25 Karnes’s Sketches of the History of Man (1774) grew out of his desire in the 1740s to write ‘a natural history of man’ in which he hoped to chart the ‘History of the Species,


The science of man 207


in its progress from the savage state to its highest civilization and improvement’.26 Consequently, in the Sketches Karnes described the similarities and differences between man and the rest of the animal kingdom, and narrated the progress of human society, social institutions such as property, government, manners, the useful and fine arts, the moral sciences, and, significantly, the status of women. In effect, Karnes collapsed Bacon’s weak distinc-tion between natural and civil history, and treated the whole of man’s past as the subject of the natural history of humankind. Fur-thermore, Karnes’s Sketches demonstrate that for most enlightened Scots the history of the species illustrated the workings of Divine Providence. Moral concerns likewise shaped Dunbar’s Essays on the History of Mankind in Rude and Cultivated Ages (1780), which focused on the improvement of the human species following the formation of the first primitive societies in order to ‘vindicate the character of the species from vulgar prejudices, and those of philo-sophic theory’ (p.i).
The paradoxical Rousseau
Another formative influence on the natural history of man was Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-72), whose works were quickly taken up and debated by the Scottish literati.27 As Adam Ferguson’s remarks (referred to above) on Rousseau’s concept of the state of nature suggest, at least some Scottish readers regarded the Discours sur l’origine et les fondemens de l’inégalité (‘Discourse on . . . Inequality’) (1755) as a natural history of man, charting the ‘progress’ of our species from innocent rudeness to corrupt refinement. Given the complexities of the Discours such a reading may seem problematic, but Rousseau’s unequivocal assertion that he was writing the true history of the species, his use of evidence drawn from travel accounts and from natural historians such as Buffon, and his speculations on man’s relations with apes and our earliest physical attributes all serve to underline the natural histori-cal dimension of the Discours. Moreover, the significance of the Discours cannot be underestimated, for Rousseau showed how the evolution of mind and the successive stages of society were inter-connected, and thereby indicated that the study of the history of our species provided the key to unlock the secrets of human nature.
The most sympathetic and systematic Scottish response to Rous-seau’s second discourse came in Lord Monboddo’s massive work on the development of language. Like Rousseau, Monboddo main-tained that both society and language were human artefacts, and that life in society was a prerequisite for the invention of the spoken (and written) word. But whereas Rousseau could not see


208 Paul B. Wood


how there could be society without language, Monboddo appealed to the evidence of natural history, which he thought showed that animals formed primitive societies even though they lacked speech. To account for the origins of language, Monboddo was obliged to reconstruct the history of man from his largely solitary beginnings to his life in civil society, ‘collected from facts, in the same manner as we collect the history of any other animal’.28 Moreover, the his-tory of our acquisition of language was for Monboddo the history of human nature, insofar as he held that speech was the dis-' tinguishing characteristic of the human species. He said that his work traced the progress of humankind from the 'birth of human nature ... to its state of maturity’ (vol. I, p. 2), and, following Rousseau, drew attention to the beneficial or harmful effects of the different modes of man’s social existence on his intellectual and physical character.
Rousseau’s vision of the corruption wrought by the civilizing process was also taken up by John Gregory. Gregory affirmed that civilization created a ‘softness and effeminacy’ of manners and a ‘debility and morbid sensibility of the nervous System, which lays the foundation of most of our diseases, and deprives us at the same time of the spirit and resolution to support them’.29 In particular, Gregory targeted the harmful effects of ‘modern luxury’ on the health of children, and urged his readers to follow the dictates of nature and common sense when caring for the young. For Gre-gory, as for Rousseau, rearing children in a ‘natural’ way was of paramount importance, because it promised to be one of the most efficacious antidotes for the ills of civilized society.
Gregory went on to issue a more extreme attack on the evils of commercial societies in a preface which he added to later editions of the Comparative View. He held up the stage of society depicted in MacPherson’s Works of Ossian (1765) as the happiest, and lashed out at the moral malaise engendered by the pursuit of wealth. According to Gregory, humankind cannot be truly happy in the savage state primarily because ‘the nobler and more distinguishing principles of human Nature lie in a great measure dormant’. Consequently, the savage is like ‘a beast of prey [who] passes his time generally in quest of food, or in supine sloth’ (p.iv). But it is in the next transitional stage of society, as described in Ossian, that humankind is truly happy, for Gregory claims that man here retains the full vigour of his body and his animal functions, possesses simple manners and warm social affections, acts as a dis-interested patriot, cultivates the expressive arts as opposed to the rational sciences, and has few wants. However, this stage ‘seldom lasts long’; the few who hold power soon abuse it, thereby unleashing the dangerous passion of ambition, and the progress of


The science of man 209


the mind coupled with foreign trade leads to moral corruption through the creation of new pleasures and wants. Gregory believed that in commercial polities money becomes ‘the universal idol to which every knee bows’, and to which men sacrifice their virtue, religion, patriotic feelings, and health. He emphasized that the pursuit of wealth placed human nature in ‘the most unhappy state in which it can ever be held’, because ‘the constitution both of body and mind becomes sickly and feeble, unable to sustain the common vicissitudes of life without sinking under them, and equally unable to enjoy its natural pleasures, because the sources of them are cut off or perverted’ (pp.v-xiii).
Following his move to the Glasgow Chair of Moral Philosophy in 1764, Thomas Reid explicitly addressed the argument of Rous-seau’s Discours sur . . . I’inegalite in his lectures on ‘the culture of the human mind’. Given Reid’s emphasis on the crucial role of education in the formation of polite, virtuous, and godly citizens, he necessarily had to refute Rousseau’s depiction of the state of nature and of the earliest forms of human society. To do so, Reid turned Rousseau’s principles and methods of analysis against him. Starting from Rousseau’s notion that human nature is perfectible, Reid argued that it is a law of human nature that the mind can be improved, and that this improvement can only be brought about by culture. Reid then sketched out a history of the development of our mental powers, modelled on the Discours, in which he argued that ‘wild men’ and savages living in primitive societies are unable to benefit fully from humankind’s natural capacity to learn because their largely solitary habits prevent them from acquiring the use of artificial, as opposed to natural, language. Without an artificial language, Reid maintained, savages cannot employ the rational or moral faculties of the mind, and hence the cognitive and emotional horizons of the primitive state were extremely lim-ited. By contrast, Reid believed our life in society promoted the acquisition of the primary vehicle of human improvement, namely artificial language. He affirmed that the higher powers of the human mind only begin to evolve once we live in a sufficiently advanced social state, wherein we finally start to form ethical con-cepts, refine our knowledge of nature, and experience true happi-ness. Because of the manifest disparity between the mental worlds of the savage and civilized states, Reid dismissed Rousseau’s con-demnation of the civilizing process as an empty paradox, and insisted that we must look to the advance of society to nurture our intellectual and active powers.30


2io Paul B. Wood


Conclusion
Reid’s response to Rousseau well illustrates a number of key fea-tures of the natural history of man in the Scottish Enlightenment. First, Reid mobilized natural historical evidence drawn from the three kingdoms of nature and information drawn from travel accounts to substantiate his view of human nature. Secondly, Reid was attentive to the comparative anatomies of the minds of animals and of man, in order to establish their distinguishing character-istics. Thirdly, Reid provided an account similar to Rousseau’s of the effects of different stages of society on the development of human nature. Reid was interested in the ways in which the vari-ous stations in life produced markedly different manners and moral attributes, and thus shared the common Scottish preoccupations with the social formation of the human mind, and the issue of moral culture. Rousseau’s historical diagnosis of the moral ills aris-ing from the advent of civil society meant that the cultivation of virtue required an understanding of the natural history of man and society. Scottish moralists like Reid responded by developing moral systems which rested on natural histories of the human spec-ies, modelled on the practices of the natural historians of the veg-etable and animal kingdoms. Reid’s natural history of man was, therefore, a characteristic Scottish blend distilled from the writings of assorted naturalists and voyagers, as well as the texts of Bacon, Rousseau, Locke, and Buffon.

Further reading
Bryson, Gladys, Maw and Society: The Scottish Enquiry of the Eighteenth Century (Princeton, 1945).
Duchet, Michèle, Anthropologie et histoire au siècle des lumières: Buffon, Voltaire, Rousseau, Helvétius, Diderot (Paris, 1971).
Glacken, Clarence J., Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought from Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century (Berkeley, 1976).
Greene, John C., The Death of Adam: Evolution and its Impact on Western Thought (Ames, IA, 1959).
Meek, Ronald L., Social Science and the Ignoble Savage (Cambridge, 1976). Pagden, Anthony, European Encounters with the New World: From Renaiss-
ance to Romanticism (New Haven, 1993).
Rousseau, G. S. and Porter, Roy (eds.), Exoticism in the Enlightenment (Manchester, 1990).
Schiebinger, Londa, Nature's Body: Gender in the Making of Modem Science (Boston, MA, 1993).
Vyverberg, Henry, Human Nature, Cultural Diversity, and the French Enlightenment (Oxford, 1989).


MARTIN GUNTAU

*3 The natural history of the earth

In the natural history museums of London, Berlin, Vienna, New York and many other cities, there are always substantial displays of minerals, rocks and fossils. These public exhibitions often date back to the eighteenth century and derive from still older collec-tions of curiosities. Such cabinets were a common feature of courtly furnishings; they served the combined functions of display, entertainment and improvement. Gemstones and other visually appealing minerals, rocks and striking natural productions - together with countless works of art - fascinated the wealthy and powerful.
Following the great spiritual awakening of the Renaissance, an interest in minerals and other productions of the earth’s crust began to grow in educated circles. It was not only collections of rare specimens and curiosities that gave rise to diverse interpret-ations. Conceptions of the nature of the earth, its origin and des-tiny, were charged with theological meaning. Moreover, the increasing commercial importance of mining made the possession of accurate knowledge about ores and their natural distribution essential. Even the highest levels of society took a great interest in natural history, as a comment published in Ulm in 1760 reveals:
Natural history, as is well known these days, is the particular science which is both universally beloved and almost universally practiced . . . Nowadays even emperors, kings and princes consider it so little opposed to their supreme and high dignity to occupy themselves with natural history, that they number it amongst their important sovereign duties to be connoisseurs, protectors and encouragers for those who devote them-selves to the knowledge of nature and who make new and generally useful discoveries therein.1
This was especially true in the case of minerals, rocks and other natural products of the earth, as well as for mining.
Attention was paid not just to attractive, curious or useful qualities. Scholars also began to collect natural productions in a systematic manner: to study, compare and describe, and, on this basis, to classify. They created a multiplicity of systems that would encompass nature into an order which could be surveyed.

211



212 Martin Guntau


The mineral kingdom and mining in natural history
Reporting and recording observations provided the empirical basis for the systems that were elaborated for inorganic nature. Those features which could be experienced directly through the senses (colour, transparency, lustre, form, weight and smell) were of prin-cipal significance in grasping the distinguishing characters of minerals.
The Swedish scholar Carl Linnaeus (1707-78) was celebrated for his classificatory systems. As early as 1735, the year of publication of his Systema naturae, Linnaeus concerned himself with the mineral kingdom, dividing it into Petrae (rocks), Minerae (minerals) and Fossilia (petrifactions), which wefre then further subdivided. In the many later editions of the Systema, he expanded the treatment of minerals. Linnaeus attempted to show that minerals were natural kinds akin to those found in the animal and plant kingdoms. How-ever, approaches to classification derived from chemistry and mining proved more successful, not least because the Linnaean sexual system, so fruitful in botany, could not be applied to minerals.2
Johann Gottschalk Wallerius (1709-85), professor of chemistry and pharmacy at the University of Uppsala, also produced a system of minerals in 1747. In a subsequent elaboration of this system in 1768 the author presented his reflections on the distinctive charac-ters and foundation for such classifications. He distinguished exter-nal from internal characters, and, in natural historical style, he took external qualities such as colour, form, taste, smell, uses and occur-rence as criteria for classification. If these features still yielded an uncertain and incomplete picture, reactions to fire or chemical reagents could also be tested, thereby revealing internal characters which could then be used to classify the mineral. Wallerius’s sub-sequent revision of his system (1778) not only expanded his earlier work, but made wider use of chemical criteria for division. Swedish chemists such as Axel Cronstedt (1722-65) and Torbern Bergman (1735-84), who succeeded Wallerius at Uppsala in 1767, extended this approach. Chemical methods were beginning to penetrate regions of natural history.3
Against the background of these interpretations by Swedish scholars, Abraham Gottlob Werner, in Saxony, developed an approach which he applied first to minerals, then to geological questions. He reached a broad audience and proved extraordinarily influential. Werner was born in 1749 to a family which had been connected with metallurgy for generations. Even as a child he had been interested in the nature of the earth, and, having studied


The natural history of the earth 213




A B 1 AII AM GOTTLOB





Figure 13.1 Abraham Gottlob Werner developed a consistent method of mineral determination based on natural history criteria; for decades he taught geology according to the tenets of Neptunism at the Mining Academy at Freiberg.

mining and metallurgy at the Mining Academy of Freiberg in Saxony, he went on to follow a course in law, languages and natu-ral history - especially mineralogy - at the University of Leipzig. In 1775 he obtained the Chair of Mining and Mineralogy at Freiberg, where he worked productively until the end of his life in 1817?
Werner’s book Von den ausserlichen Kennzeichen der Fossilien (‘On the External Characters of Minerals’, Leipzig, 1774) brought him widespread recognition. In this work he presented a technique for identifying minerals through the human senses. These were


214 Martin Guntau





characters such as crystal form, external surface, external lustre, internal lustre, fracture, form of fragments, transparency, streak, colour, hardness, flexibility, adhesion to the tongue, and sound. He described individual characters in a minutely detailed manner, and scrupulously subdivided them in such a way as to maximize their utility for mineral identification. For the colour red alone, Werner distinguished thirteen different varieties: morning or aurora red, hyacinth red, brick red, scarlet red, cochineal red, blood red, copper red, carmine red, crimson red, peach-blossom red, flesh red, cherry red and brownish red. His student Dietrich Ludwig Gustav Karsten (1768-1810) even went so far as to dis-tinguish twenty-nine different variations of red.
Through the diagnosis of specific combinations of qualities, based on external characters, mineral type could be recognized rap-idly and by relatively simple means. Werner became very famous, and was hailed as the supreme master of a method of identification unmatched in mineralogy for some time. With this work, he pro-vided a perfected version of the natural historical method of min-eral identification, and, simultaneously, a methodology for miner-alogy as a discipline, which began to emerge as a science distinct from natural history.
In the course of more than forty years as a mineralogist, Werner published several versions of his classification, which increasingly came to be based upon chemical criteria. By 1777 Johann Friedrich Gmelin (1748-1804) could list more than twenty-five mineral sys-tems, produced between 1650 and 1775 by different European authors. One might add numerous accounts of crystals, including several by the French mineralogist Jean-Baptiste Romé de l’Isle (1736-90), who compiled them while cataloguing the cabinets of wealthy patrons. Each of these accounts, in their own way, indi-cated the nature of natural history, which aimed primarily to record and systematize natural objects, initially without a historical and chronological perspective.
These major developments in the natural history of the earth drew on centuries of experience derived from intensive mining practices. The mining centres in Sweden, the Tyrol, Transylvania and Thuringia - and notably those in Bohemia and Saxony - were particularly significant. As early as the sixteenth century, a variety of small books on mining and assaying were published in central Europe. They supplied the economic, technological and natural knowledge necessary to obtain minerals. In his writings, the Saxon physician Georgius Agricola (1494-1555) depicted minerals and phenomena such as the erosive effects of water, volcanoes and earthquakes; his De re metallica (1556) provided encyclopaedic descriptions of metallurgy and mining technology with impressive illustrations. The book remained a classic resource for mining in


The natural history of the earth 215


Europe, and even in China and South America, for two centuries.
Many authors prepared works on mining and metallurgy, which dealt with prospecting for valuable mineral deposits, mining boundaries, extraction procedures, water management, weather machines, ore mining, smelting and metallurgy. Some of the lead-ing scholars of the era concerned themselves with similar ques-tions, since mining and metallurgy were the most important areas of commercial production throughout the period. At the end of the seventeenth century Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) drew up extensive plans for wind-driven mechanisms and the man-agement of water in the mines of the Harz mountains. During the Baroque period full descriptions of mountain sites and mining technology were produced, such as Magnolia dei in locis subterraneis (VJ2']') by the physician Franz Ernst Bruckmann (1697—1753) of Brunswick, which described over 1,600 mines throughout the world. In the same period the practical engineer Jacob Leupold’s multivolume Theatrum machinarían (1725) embodied the results of his extensive experience drawn from mining production. Mining provided the foundations for much contemporary technological knowledge.
Mining practices also suppled vital information concerning the properties and distribution of minerals, which needed to be recog-nized quickly and unmistakably. For miners, knowledge about ores and the rocks in which they occurred was very valuable - especially knowledge about lodes from which precious and semi-precious metals could be extracted. Systematic texts described the different kinds of lodes; their horizontal and vertical distribution; their relations with the surrounding rocks; and ways of recognizing them in nature.
Knowledge about the earth drawn from mining had thus achieved considerable breadth by the eighteenth century. In most countries it had become essential to the discovery of ores and other valuable minerals. The centralized state bureaucracies of the Enlightenment recognized that mining officials required not only legal and engineering knowledge, but an understanding of the natural history of the earth. The universities offered only a very incomplete training in this regard, and one, moreover, that was wholly theoretical.
The growing need for training was filled by mining academies founded in the last third of the eighteenth century. On the heels of the success of institutions offering instruction in the German lands, the Austrian empire, Scandinavia, Russia and South Amer-ica, the first academic chair of mining was founded in 1762 at the University of Prague. Mining academies followed in rapid suc-cession in many different countries: the Freiberg school in 1765; Schemnitz, Austro-Hungary in 1770; Berlin, Prussia in 1770; St


2i6 Martin Guntau






Figure 13.2 The mineral collection of the Freiberg Mining Academy. The study of mineral specimens was a major part of the teaching programme of the technical institutes founded in the second half of the eighteenth century. Title-page from Bericht vom Bergbau (Bergakademie zu Freyberg, 1769).

Petersburg, Russia in 1773; Almaden, Spain in 1777; Paris, France in 1783; and Mexico City in 1792. This was the first generation of technical institutes of higher education to coexist with the uni-versities, and in which the curriculum centred on the natural his-tory of the earth. It was in this way, through the burgeoning demand of governments for trained officials, that disciplines such as mineralogy and geognosy acquired an institutional basis for the first time. But there were also other sites within which knowledge about the earth’s nature was being generated.

Physicotheology, mystery and natural history
Natural history permeated the natural theology or physicotheology of the eighteenth century. The study of nature was designed to render the scale of God’s natural creation comprehensible and to affirm Christian faith. Religious tracts, treatises and sermons fea-tured countless discussions of animals and plants, water and rocks, thunder and lightning, the universe and the earth, treated in the strictly natural historical sense. Such phenomena could, for the


The natural history of the earth 217
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------i
most part, be experienced through the senses. Authors described them in great detail, drawing together many earlier facts. Particu-larly in the first half of the eighteenth century, publication and wide distribution of books and pamphlets made it possible for knowledge about nature to spread to many parts of society, even though natural history played a role subordinate to medicine or philosophy in university teaching. In a period when ‘enlightened’ thinking was becoming widespread, natural history (especially in the Protestant countries of northern and central Europe) could be used to provide proof for Biblical claims, and thus confute atheists and sceptics.
Thomas Burnet’s Telluris theoria sacra (1681) was a key publi-cation, and after translation into English and German it remained widely read throughout the following century. With great conyic- tion and a captivating style, Burnet (1636-1715) explained the for-mation of the earth, including its chief alterations and current cir-cumstances, from the perspective of contemporary natural knowledge. In presenting a physical interpretation of Biblical claims, however, he laid himself open to criticism from other scho-lars and theologians. Within a short space of time the English natu-ral philosophers William Whiston (1667-1752) and John Wood-ward (1665-1728) produced analogous theories of the earth, which also achieved a wide distribution in Europe. In his Essay toward a Natural History of the Earth (1695) Woodward explained that the universal Deluge described in the Bible had produced the layers of the earth’s crust and the fossilization of plants and animals.5 In doing so, he drew on earlier accounts of the cause of these natural phenomena, and his work gave them great currency during the eighteenth century. Such ‘theories of the earth’ demanded a his-torical and genetic perspective, which began to take shape in the decades around 1700.
As early as 1669 the Danish scholar Niels Stensen (1638-86) had suggested that mountains had not always existed in their present form.6 From the ordering of strata in Tuscany, he reconstructed the sequence of their formation and, in this way, developed a his-torical perspective with regard to changes in the earth’s nature. At the same time, the London natural philosopher Robert Hooke (1635-1703) found that different animals and plants seemed to be present in different parts of the strata sequence. What he believed to be fossilized organisms could potentially be used to produce a chronological order of rocks in the same way that coins established a chronology of human history. Previous accounts of natural objects had been essentially in the form of stories, in which their position in a chronological sequence had no part.
In 1700 naturalists continued a fierce debate over the nature of puzzling objects found in the earth, especially those with appar-


2i8 Martin Guntau


ently organic forms. Some interpreters sought signs in natural pro-ductions, such as handwriting in ‘graphic granite’, ‘thunderstones’ shot from the heavens and Ruinenmarmor (marble with pictures of ruined cities in it). Unusually shaped rocks were supposed to result from a specific natural force or vis plastica, which had produced ‘sports of nature’ (lusus naturae), a concept dating from the Middle Ages that remained widespread among scholars. In these circum-stances, forgeries of ‘figured stones’, which repeatedly appeared in prints of the first half of the eighteenth century, made consensus about a correct interpretation hard to achieve.
A striking example was the ‘Würzburger Lügensteine’ (lying stones of Würzburg), which appeared in Ebelstadt, to the south-east of Würzburg in Germany, in 1725 (Figure 13.3). These fig-ured stones, resembling animals, plants, letters, stars and so on, were described in Johann Bartholomeus Beringer’s Lithographiae Wirceburgensis (1726).7 The stones, however, were fakes con-structed by academic colleagues to ridicule Beringer (c. 1667-1738), who was known to be fascinated by fossils. Beringer did not believe that all these unusual figured stones were necessarily the remains of once-living creatures, and thought the whole phenom-enon unclear, doubtful and inconsistent. By publishing his work on the stones, Beringer hoped to encourage other scholars to inves-tigate and comment upon them. The nature of different figured stones was at the forefront of debates about the natural history of the earth.
The Zürich physician and natural philosopher Johann Jakob Scheuchzer (1672-1733) had studied a tremendous variety of dif-ferent phenomena relating to the earth, and described their origins in line with the physicotheological tradition. Originally, he too had interpreted fossils as the results of an unusual power which had shaped them into figured stones by chance. But after reading Woodward’s Essay, he began to explain them as remains of living beings which had perished in the Deluge. In a short treatise of 1708, he portrayed different fish lamenting their death in the Deluge (Figure 13.4).8 Petrifactions could thereby be interpreted as impressions of once-living animals and plants, even if they were engendered within a brief period by a single event. Scheuchzer also explained many other changes on the surface of the globe as products of the Biblical flood.
It was vital for natural history that Scheuchzer’s new interpret-ation stimulated him to collect plant and animal fossils, and to have descriptions and engravings of them printed. His Herbarium diluvi- anum first appeared in 1709, and by 1723 it was already into a third edition. The discovery of a fossil skeleton in a chalk quarry near Oeningen, in 1726, was an important event for Scheuchzer. He held the remains to be the leg bones of a wicked human, whose


The natural history of the earth 219


i




Figure 13.3 Some of the strange fossil specimens illustrated by J. B. A. Beringer in his Lithographiae Wirceburgensis (Wurzburg, 1726). These proved to be fakes planted by jealous colleagues at the University of Wurzburg.

sins had been punished by the coming of the Deluge. Scheuchzer portrayed the fossil in natural historical terms, but gave its creation a moralizing Scriptural interpretation. It was not until a century later that Georges Cuvier reclassified this fossil as the remains of a giant salamander, which he named, in honour of its discoverer, Andrias Scheuchzen9


220 Martin Guntau




Figure 13.4 Portraits of fossils by Johann Jakob Scheuchzer in his work on ‘The Different Fish that Died in the Great Flood’. From Scheuchzer, Bildnissen verschiedener Fischen und dero Theilen, welche in der Sündfluth zu Grund gegangen (Zürich, 1708), Table II.

The wider religious culture of this period contributed substan-tially to knowledge of nature. It Was for religious reasons that Scheuchzer encouraged an interest in fossils, developed the depic-tion of strata sections, carried out regular measurements of air pressure with a barometer, repeatedly observed the glaciers of his native country, refuted the view that mountain crystals had formed from snow, and, as early as 1705, climbed to the summit of St Gotthard, which at that time some regarded as the highest moun-tain in Europe. In all, he earned himself a name for the study of the natural history of Switzerland, and furthermore provided an impulse for similar studies in other countries.
Scheuchzer published works which he conceived as natural his-torical explications of Biblical texts. He died before completing his comprehensive Physica sacra, which was published in four folio volumes in Augsburg and Ulm from 1731 to 1735. In 750 copper-plate engravings and more than 2,000 pages of text, he presented a wealth of observations and ideas which give an impressive con-ception of the permeation of natural history by religion.10
Further works in which the affirmation of religious faith


The natural history of the earth 221


provided a goal for describing natural objects and circumstances were also produced during this period. In the German-speaking lands, Friedrich Christian Lesser (1692-1754), the evangelical pastor of Nordhausen, Thuringia, had a great interest in natural history. In 1732 he published his work on lithotheology, which he wished to be read as a natural history and religious study of stones. He wished to demonstrate the omnipotence, goodness and justice of the great Creator, to explain the claims of the Scriptures, and to rouse men to the admiration, praise arid service of the supreme Deity. In this light he described minerals, rocks and fossils system-atically from a natural historical standpoint, including their uses and misuses. In later editions of his lithology he claimed to have recognized a representation of Christ’s crucifixion in an agate, and depicted it in his book as a miraculous natural form (Figure 13.5). This picture, evidently drawn by a human hand, was intended to confirm religious belief, although by the mid-eighteenth century such portrayals were increasingly criticized.
From the very first volume of his Histoire naturelle (1749) Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon (1707-88), attacked the Christian conceptions of Burnet, Whiston and Woodward. His own deistic claims about the earth’s age, based on experiments with cooling globes, soon came under fire from the Sorbonne’s the-ology faculty, since they contradicted expert chronological studies of the Bible showing that the earth was 6,000 years old.11 Soon after, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) pub-lished his Allgemeine Naturgeschichte urid Theorie des Himmels (1755), in which neither God nor the Bible directly underpinned earth history. In 1763 the Russian Mikhail Vasilievich Lomonosov (1711-65) also objected to the claim that the Deluge had led to petrified shells on the tops of mountains. Such views combated physicotheological ideas and treated human understanding as the only valid basis for ascribing meanings to natural phenomena. The methods that scholars adopted in their natural historical work increasingly embodied the aims of the Enlightenment.
Rocks, water and fire
Around the mid-eighteenth century new ways of thought began to become established, which, in particular, adopted the notion that there had been a genuine alteration in nature in the past. Although natural history had initially only consisted of stories in which static accounts of natural objects were given, observations involving a historical perspective could now also be made, so that a true his-tory (in the modern sense) of nature could be produced. The view that the earth had undergone multiple transformations since the Creation or the Deluge, and thus had a history, became more





Figure 13.5 The ‘image of Christ crucified on the cross’ As the lower scroll exclaims, ‘such a wonderful vision has Nature made in an agate’. From F. C. Lesser, Lilhotheologie (Hamburg, 1732), no. II. S. 294.


.222 Martin Guntau


common. Rocks and fossils could be repeatedly produced, and did not result from a single great flood. The age of the earth might be considered in terms of millions of years, and need not accord with the 6,000 years calculated from the Bible. This was a deep- rooted transformation in the conception of the natural history of the earth.
Extensive observations encouraged new possibilities for expla-nation. Debate about the essential nature of fossil objects became less important than their potential use for understanding the earth’s past. Scholars of different countries made observations on moun-tain formation which yielded a global picture. Starting from accounts of different European regions, they began to develop a common language for representing the basic divisions of the upper parts of the earth’s crust.
In 1786 Werner compiled the findings of many scholars into a single classification of rocks and mountains. He demonstrated a succession of formations, each consisting of beds or layers stacked on top of each other. By ‘formations’ (Gebirge), Werner meant rock complexes of the same substantial composition and mode of origin. These changed in character from upper layers (4) to lower ones
(1) ; together they constituted the structure of mountains:
(4) Alluvial rocks: sand, gravel, clay, loam, peat, bituminous earth, etc.;
(3) Volcanic rocks: lava, ashes, pumice, tufa, sulphur, hot springs, etc.;
(2) Floetz rocks: limestone, sandstone, coal, grauwacke, chalk, Salt, etc.;
(1) Primitive rocks: granite, gneiss, mica schist, clay slate, por-phyry, basalt, serpentine, etc.
Werner related these formations to directed changes in conditions during the earth’s past.
Similar but less elaborate conceptions of the structure and his-tory of mountains were widespread in the mid-eighteenth century; the French diplomat Beno.t de Maillet (1656-1738) suggested aspects of it in his famous Telliamed (1748). In a work published in Berlin in 1756 the mining administrator and academician Johann Gottlob Lehmann (1719-69) distinguished between the Primitive mountains, which he claimed had originated at the Creation, and Secondary mountains, which he ascribed to the Mosaic Deluge12 (Figure 13.6). Above these lay a third class of rocks, which had been formed by volcanoes or massive flooding. The court physician at Rudolstadt, Georg Christian Fiichsel (1722-73), described a suc-cession of strata he had observed in Thuringia in analogous terms. At around the same time in Italy, the mining expert Giovanni Ard- uino (1714-95) drew upon the treatises of the physician Antonio


The natural history of the earth 223




Vallisnieri (1715) and the cleric Lazzaro Moro (1740) in his re-searches into the composition, structure and development of mountains near Padua, Vicenza and Verona. Arduino divided them into Primitive, Secondary, Tertiary and Volcanic rocks. In Uppsala, Torbern Bergman’s physical description of the earth in 1771 had produced a threefold division of the formations on the earth’s crust. Peter Simon Pallas (1741-1811) came to broadly similar conclusions as a result of extensive travels in Russia.
These observations began to be presented not just verbally, but in strikingly visual terms. In 1756 Lehmann published a horizontal section for a sequence in Thuringia, and Fuchsel brought together several of his conceptions in 1761 in a distribution map (Figure 13.7). And in the manuscripts of Arduino, sketches of sections (1758) represent phenomena from the natural history of the earth; these were a form of illustration that Moro had used in 1740 for describing strata. These pictorial genres later became preconditions for the development of stratigraphy as a part of historical geology, based upon knowledge about the character and layering of rock masses.
Many hypotheses were put forward concerning the history of the earth. Joining in the anti-clerical campaigns of the Enlightenment, many authors abandoned the aims and interpretative styles charac-teristic of the older forms of physicotheology. In the final two dec-ades of the eighteenth century a pair of opposing theoretical con-cepts emerged as fundamental. Both ‘Neptunism’ and ‘Plutonism’,

Figure 13.6 Section of stratification at the Mansfeld Kupferschiefer, one of the first sections to be based on a specific locality. From Johann Gottlob Lehmann, Versuch einer Geschichte von Fl.tz-Gebürgen (Berlin,
1756).


224 Martin Guntau




Figure 13.7 Map of
Thuringia, published in 1761 by Georg Christian Füchsel. The distribution of rocks is indicated by a system of numerals. From Füchsel, ‘Historia terrae et maris, ex historia thuringiae, per montium descriptionem’, Aclorum Academiae electorate moguntinae scientiarum utilium quae Erfordiae est, Erfordiae II (1761), pp. 44-254-

as they came to be called, had roots in the traditional natural his-tory of the earth, but also offered new perspectives. In both, the representation of the character of the earth’s past was at stake, especially the causes of change.
Werner was one of the most influential supporters of Neptun- ism. He believed the whole surface of the earth to have been covered originally by a primitive ocean, and assumed that nearly all formations had developed in water or had been shaped by water. He proposed: ‘The solid globe, insofar as we know it, was originally formed entirely from water ... the work that has been done on it by fire is insignificant in comparison with the whole.”3 Werner, a deist, did not explicitly invoke the Deluge, the Bible or God in his explanations.


The natural history of the earth 225


Werner held that approximately one million years ago conditions were.very different from the present. A great fog floated above the vast water surface, so that little sun reached it. Since there were no terrestrial masses, land plants and animals were absent. The water of this great ocean contained many chemical components and thus few or no organisms. These were the conditions for the devel-opment of the Primitive rocks, which were seen primarily as pre-cipitates from solution, largely without mechanical sediments or fossil remains of plants or animals.
As the water level gradually began to descend, dry land emerged. On the dry surface processes of destruction occurred, producing debris and mechanical sediments. Salts were also deposited. Plants began to cover the land, and animals multiplied in the sea and on the continents. Under these conditions lime-stones, sandstones, bituminous sediments and coal were produced, and the formation of fossils increased. These circumstances were preconditions for the development of the Secondary or Floetz rocks in a second great stage of the earth’s history.
Werner demarcated a further chapter in the earth’s past by an increase in the mechanical sediments, to which the new phenom-enon of volcanoes was added. Neptunists rejected deep-lying heat sources in the earth’s crust as causes for volcanoes, and explained them by means of burning bituminous layers in the younger and higher layers near the earth’s surface. These were the conditions for the formation of Volcanic rocks. The Alluvial rocks were the youngest, formed mostly from sand, lime and clay. This phase has lasted until the present, with its characteristic forces of terrestrial change.
Although many Neptunist views seem speculative, they helped to produce a picture of earth history with successive phases. Indi-vidual phases possessed particular characters, but there were gra-dations from one to another, so that each new phase built upon the preceding. Werner himself did not enter into detailed expla-nations based on chemistry, preferring to see processes of precipi-tation and consolidation in mechanical terms. His many followers, including the philosopher Henrich Steffens (1773-1845), the trav-eller Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859), and the Scottish min-eralogist Robert Jameson (1774-1854), greatly increased the role of chemistry. All the Wernerians based the development of the earth within the history of nature upon unchanging physical laws.
Whilst water and its operations were fundamental for the Neptu-nists, the Plutonists saw formations as caused above all by heat and fusion. James Hutton (1726-97), an independent gentleman in Scotland, was the leading supporter of Plutonism, and had worked out a detailed theory of the earth. He had studied medicine in Edinburgh, Paris and Leiden, but also had an interest in


226 Martín Guntau .
chemistry, philosophy, rural economy and, above all, geological issues. After travelling in the Netherlands, Belgium and France, he settled in Edinburgh and enthusiastically undertook excursions in Scotland. A man of the Enlightenment, Hutton founded a small society, the Oyster Club, together with the economist Adam Smith (1723-90), the chemist Joseph Black (1728-1819) and the math-ematician John Playfair (1748-1819) and others. Over communal meals they discussed problems in natural philosophy. Unlike Werner, Hutton never taught, and his views spread primarily through printed works published between 1785 and 1795.14
In his Theory of the Earth (1795, vol. II, p. 355), Hutton claimed ‘that subterraneous fire and heat had been employed in the consoli-dation of our earth, and in the erection of that consolidated body into the place of land’. High temperatures and fire were the decis-ive powers in the concretion of loose sedimentary masses into rocks, and the motor for the alterations in the earth’s nature; the role of water was rejected. On this basis Hutton also explained the underlying processes in the earth’s crust, processes which required vast spans of time (Figure 13.8). He started from the position that the earth possesses a solidified crust with enclosing shells of water and air above it. In the past the interchanges between these regions had produced a multitude of changes. There was a constant exchange of land and sea, which manifested itself in the erosion of continents and the formation of rock on the sea bed.
Hutton distinguished three stages in the terrestrial cycle. The first was typified by the habitable continents of the present surface of the earth. A second stage could be observed in the eroded masses of older parts of the crust, which had been washed into the ocean and there collected on the ocean floor. In the third stage, heat fused these sediments to form new rocks. Raised out of the water, these rocks replaced older parts of the crust which had been destroyed - only to be eroded themselves in due course. In Hutton’s theory one continent followed another in an eternal circulation of nature. Earth history was thus an indefinitely con-tinuing series of cycles, with heat and fusion as the essential causes of the genesis of new rocks and their uplift. Hutton described this system as part of a divinely instituted natural order.
Followers of Werner and Hutton clashed throughout Europe and America, particularly over the question of the means and manner of the origin of basalt. Whilst Neptunists saw basalt as a rock formed in water, Plutonists claimed to recognize its subterranean genesis through observations of its frequent association with vol-canoes. The basalt controversy attracted intense public interest, and the great German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749- 1832) even portrayed it in the second part of his Faust.


The natural history of the earth 227




ftarm sprvtys



Unhwwn nyion, supposed to consist of lava kept in a semifluid state by heat under the various names of Granite Gniefe, JPorphery, dfoorstvne Whinstone, Ragy, Slate Basaltes.

Conclusion
The natural history of the earth had become, next to botany, a preferred field of study for scholars, administrative officials and the educated laity during the eighteenth century. Many eagerly occu-pied themselves with minerals and fossils, and keenly followed debates about the formation and development of the earth, so that the latest publications were widely read. The host of books, pam-phlets and journal articles on geological or mineralogical themes could scarcely be assimilated. This prompted Johann Ehrenreich Fichtel (1732-95), of Transylvania to sarcastic exaggeration in 1792:

Figure 13.8 A theoretical cross-section of the earth, illustrating the Plutonist view of the importance of central heat. This was prepared by James Hutton’s friend, the poet Erasmus Darwin. The original caption reads: ‘Section of the Earth. A sketch of a supposed Section of the Earth in respect to the disposition of the Strata over each other without regard to their proportions or number’. From E. Darwin, The Botanic Garden: A Poem, in Two Parts (London,
1791), ‘Additional Notes,’ facing p. 67.


228 Martin Guntau


I was told that in the last but one decade of this century, more had been written on minerals than on theology, philosophy and jurisprudence put together in half a century - in fact, that mineralogical papers were as common as hay and straw in a good year nowadays.15
Mineralogy had become fashionable, and the natural history of the earth was a vital aspect of polite learning.
Natural history had changed its nature. The study of the three realms of nature that it had contained - minerals, plants and animals - developed into mineralogy, botany and zoology. The recognition that nature altered with time was important in determining this transformation: it marked a passage from rep-resentations in the form of stories and descriptions of nature to a history of nature with variable circumstances and qualities. This was especially true of the natural history of the earth, 'which became the basis for mineralogy. Eighteenth-century mineralogy included geognosy, from which geology would be developed, and oryctognosy, from which modern mineral science was created.
In wider historical terms, curiosities collected to elucidate the natural history of the earth became essential elements in the system of the modern sciences. It was on these foundations that biostra-tigraphy, historical geology, physical geology and other new earth sciences would be constructed in the nineteenth century.
Further reading
Faul, H. and C, Faul, Il Began with a Stone: A History of Geology from the
Stone Age to the Age of Plate Tectonics (New York, 1983).
Frangsmyr, T., ‘Linnaeus as geologist’, in T. Frangsmyr (ed.), Linnaeus:
The Man and his Work (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1983), pp. 110-55. Guntau, M., ‘The emergence of geology as scientific discipline’, History of
Science, 16 (1978), pp. 280-90.
Hutton, J., Theory of the Earth with Proofs and Illustrations, 2 vols. (Edinburgh, 1795).
Laudan, R., From Mineralogy to Geology: The Foundations of a Science, 1650-1830 (Chicago, 1987).
Porter, R., The Making of Geology: Earth Science in Britain, 1660-1815 (Cambridge, 1977).
‘The terraqueous globe’, in G. S. Rousseau and R. Porter (eds.), The Ferment of Knowledge: Studies in the Historiography of Eighteenth-century Science (Cambridge, 1980), pp. 285-324.
The Earth Sciences: An Annotated Bibliography (New York, 1983).
Rossi, P., The Dark Abyss of Time: The History of the Earth and the History
of Nations from Hooke to Vico (Chicago, 1984).
Rudwick, M. J. S., ‘The shape and meaning of earth history’, in D. C.
Lindberg and R. L. Numbers (eds.), God and Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter between Christianity and Science (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1986), pp. 296-321.


The naturai history of the earth


229


Werner, A. G., On the External Characters of Minerals, trans. A. Carozzi of Von den .usserlichen Kennzeichen der Fossilien (orig. 1774; Urbana, IL, 1962).
Short Classification and Description of the Various Rocks, trans, with introd. by A. Ospovat of Kurze Klassifikation und Beschreibung der ver-schiedenen Gebirgsarten (orig. 1786; New York, 1971).

f



NICHOLAS JARDINE

14 Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature

In the section ‘Histoire naturelle’ of his report of 1810 to Napo-leon’s Council of State, Georges Cuvier, acting in his capacity as a Secretary to the Institut National, offers a summary of the new ‘German philosophy of nature’, condemning it for its confusion of the moral with the physical and the metaphorical with the logical, whilst conceding that it includes men of real talent who have enriched natural history with ‘precious facts’.1 Not all received the new German Naturphilosophie so critically. The Germanophile Madame Germaine de Stael wrote in 1810 with approval of the works of Friedrich Schelling, Franz Xaver von Baader, and Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert ‘in which the sciences are pre-sented from a point of view which captivates reflection and imagin-ation’.2 A few years earlier her friend, the ‘Grand Tourist’ Henry Crabb Robinson, attending Schelling’s lectures at Jena, had vaunted the new German mystical philosophy over the cold rational quibbling of the English and French.3 And a few years later Samuel Taylor Coleridge, embarking on his reading of the geological works of Schelling’s disciple, the Naturphilosoph Hen- rich Steffens, enthusiastically endorsed the project for a develop-mental history of the earth and its productions; and, though appalled at Steffens’s ‘pantheistic blasphemies’, he even dreamed of studying under him.4
The natural historians with whose works we shall be concerned were all closely involved in the culture of German Romanticism. I shall, accordingly, first indicate some key points in the Romantic vision of nature and history. There follows a brief account of the Naturphilosophie of Schelling and his circle. The ambitions of the Naturphilosophen were boundless: nothing less than a re-enactment of the creation, a reintegration of spirit and nature, and success (where the French Revolutionaries had failed) in initiating the Mill-ennium. But in academic and disciplinary terms their attainments were more limited. As Cuvier noted, it was only in the German lands that they achieved a general recognition, and only in the fields of medicine and natural history that they secured a measure of control. In the third section of the chapter I indicate the range of the natural historical interests of the Naturphilosophen,

230



Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 231

examining the major works of three of them: the geologist Henrich Steffens, the botanist Nees von Esenbeck, and the comparative anatomist Lorenz Oken. I shall conclude with some remarks on the origins and cultural significance of this remarkable brand of natural history.

German Romanticism and Naturphilosophie
If there is a single mood characteristic of Romantic writing, it is Sehnsucht - longing or nostalgia - for the morning of the world when mankind was at one with itself and nature, for homeland and childhood, for past experiences, past loves, past intimations of immortality.5 How can mankind recover the lost solidarity with nature? There was a fair measure of agreement on how not to pro- * ceed. Imposition on nature of a static, mechanical philosophy is no route to understanding. Along with bureaucratic despotism, codified law, pragmatic history, mimetic poetry, and all the other apparatus of ‘that absence of ideas that dares to call itself Enlight-enment’ (Schelling) it is symptomatic of mankind’s alienation from nature.
As for positive prescriptions for human redemption, it is harder to find common ground. In Novalis’s (Friedrich von Hardenberg)
Die Lehrlinge zu Sais (‘The Apprentices at Sais’), a paradigm of High Romanticism, the central theme is precisely the multiplicity and divergence of the roads to reunion with nature. And Romantic artistic and literary activity is indeed marked by an extraordinary proliferation of new Styles, genres, and philosophies. If there is a single value characteristic of German Romanticism it is the barely translatable Eigentümlichkeit, the singularity, individuality, distinc-tion, and groundedness of a person, work of art, scene, or object as constituted by local history and setting - their resistance to gen-eralization, translocation, or representation. It is in their Eigentüm-lichkeit that subjects possess their freedom and their moral and aes-thetic character. A pervasive theme in Romantic writing about mankind and nature is fragmentation, the dark side, so to speak, of Eigentümlichkeit. The lost unity is not to be pieced together by reason, but glimpsed by intuition in traces, relics, particular view-points. Understanding of nature is not to be set out once and for all in treatises, theories, and allegories, but rather in productive forms, susceptible like nature itself of multiple interpretations: fragments, aphorisms, symbols, sketches.
Naturphilosophie and natural history are, for the Romantics, by no means the most direct ways back to nature. The most authentic reunion with nature requires not the discursive exercise of the mind, but immediate engagement: the innocent gaze of the child (Novalis), the sensitivity of the nervously disordered (Schubert),


232 Nicholas Jardine


the absorption of the artist-genius lost in the work of creation (Schelling). It is in aesthetics rather than philosophy that the Romantics theorize the reunion with nature. And it is, of course, in the arts - in expressive poetry, in sublime landscape painting, above all, in absolute music - that we find the great monuments to their enterprise. For all that, Naturphilosophie and natural his-tory have a part in the culture of Romanticism: they are roads to redemption, though minor and devious ones.
There is no canonical work of the new German Naturphilosophie. Its most famous exponent, F. W. A. Schelling (1775-1854), pro-duced not one, but half a dozen systems and sketches of systems in as many years. In the same years Karl Eschenmayer and Franz Xaver von Baader sketched divergent systems;6 and even among Schelling’s declared followers some (Johann Wilhelm Ritter, Stef-fens, and Oken, for example) departed widely from his teaching. There are, however, certain features of Naturphilosophie that clearly set it apart from other schools in the natural philosophy and sci-ences of the period.
First, the Naturphilosophen were committed to a very strong form of vitalism. Like many medics and physiologists of the period, they postulated vital forces to explain the development and activities of living beings. And like many historians, both natural and civil, they used organic terms - ‘growth’, ‘development’, ‘maturity’, ‘decay’ - to describe the history of the universe, of the earth and its rocks, of the cultural and political fortunes of mankind. But they went much further, treating the cosmos itself as a living being, the source of all particular lives.7 As the anatomist, gynaecologist, and landscape painter Carl Gustav Carus declared: ‘If once we have recognised nature as being in the process of endless inner linkage, then we must at the same time consider it as the absolute living thing, from whose primordial life (Urleberi) are derived the appear-ances of life of each particular living thing’.8
The Naturphilosophen were further committed to a thorough-going dynamism. With Kant, J. H. Lambert, and many others of the final decades of the eighteenth century they sought a develop-mental history of the heavens, the earth, and the earth’s inhabi-tants. But where these earlier programmes set aside the question of the ultimate origins of the universe, of its inhabitants, and of the human spirit, the Naturphilosophen had no such inhibitions. They aimed at a total history, one that would encompass the entire differentiation of the cosmos from the original oneness, through the formation of the solar system and the earth, the proliferation of the three kingdoms of nature (minerals, plants, and animals), to the culmination of the universe in humankind. At least in the case of Schelling and his disciples, such a total history was envis-aged dialectically, as a drama of successive partial resolutions and


Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 233


renewed manifestations of the primordial conflict of forces that sprang from the original unity. Nature considered dynamically, natura naturans, is this play of forces. The individuals of the visible world, stones, plants, animals, and people - natura naturata - are its by-products, each kind representing a particular and temporary balance of forces. That all beings are thus derived from and expressive of an original ideal unity is evident in the network of correspondences that pervades the cosmos - between the macro-cosm and the earth, between the earth and the human microcosm, between plants and animals, between lower animals and higher animals. Indeed, there is nothing beyond or prior to natura naturans: properly understood the developmental history of nature is but the outward manifestation of the history of spirit. As Schelling remarked: ‘What we call nature is a poem encoded in secret and mysterious signs, but if the riddle could be solved, we would recognise in nature the Odyssey of the spirit’.9 Or, as Stef-fens enthused: ‘Do you want to know nature? Turn your glance inwards and you will be granted the privilege of beholding nature’s stages of development in the stages of your spiritual education. Do you want to know yourself? Seek in nature. Her works are those of the selfsame spirit’.10
There is considerable variety in the methods used by the Natur- philosophen to justify their claims and order their writings. First and foremost, there is the method of a priori construction. This is the dialectical procedure whereby the Naturphilosoph ‘re-creates’ or ‘re-produces’ the universe, recapitulating the process whereby successively higher and more specialized natural products arise as the successive partial resolutions of the primordial strife. Then there is the ‘magic wand of analogy’ (Novalis), the working out of the correspondences of structure and function that testify to the unity of plan underlying the development of the cosmos. What of observation and experiment? The Naturphilosophen were certainly opposed to sciences ‘stuck in the rubbish dump of sensory reflexion’ (Steffens) - chemistry based on analytical experiment in the manner of Lavoisier, botany based on standardized descrip-tions in the manner of Linnaeus. But they certainly did not, as is often alleged, repudiate observation and experiment outright. Rather they valued Eigentümlichkeit in the realm of phenomena, seeking experiences that bring into play the aesthetic and intro-spective faculties of the observer, allowing nature to speak directly to us. This led to an extraordinary emphasis on autoexperiment-ation, typified by the Galvanic experiments performed by Alex-ander von Humboldt and Johann Ritter.11 And in the domain of natural historical observation it led to a quest for the primordial or ideal types from which the diversity of natural beings can be derived. Exemplary for this approach were Goethe’s widely


234 Nicholas Jardine


emulated morphological studies, in particular his presentation of plant organs as successive transformations of the primordial leaf, and of the skull and vertebrae as successive modifications and fusions of the primordial vertebra.12

Kingdoms of nature
Let us start with Schelling himself.13 In 1799, the year after his call to a professorship of philosophy at Jena from Leipzig (where he had studied mathematics, physics, and medicine), Schelling set out his programme for a ‘wholly new natural history’ in his Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie (‘First Sketch of a System of Nature Philosophy’). He first notes that some have inter-preted the succession of organizations as evidence of a genealogy of types, even going so far as to suppose that all types of living beings may be the progeny of a single ancestral type. (Schelling evidently has in mind Kant’s speculations, in Critique of Judgement, sect. 80, on the derivation of all living beings from a single original organization, ‘the womb of mother Earth’.14) This is impossible, Schelling claims: ‘The distinctness of the stages at which we now see the organisations fixed evidently presupposes a ratio of the orig-inal forces peculiar to each one; whence it follows that nature must have initiated anew each product that appears fixed to us.’ When properly viewed, comparative anatomy and physiology testify not to a genealogy of species, but to a development which realizes an original ideal. Given that the various types of organization are determined by and expressive of ratios of organic forces, it should be possible-in principle to construct a priori the entire sequence of types of organization. In a striking passage Schelling goes on to contrast such a ‘history of nature herself’ both with the standard descriptive natural history and with the genealogical natural history that Kant had proposed.
Natural history has up to now been only the description of nature, as Kant has very rightly remarked. He himself suggests the name ‘natural history’ for a special branch of the science of nature, namely knowledge of the gradual alterations that the various organisations of the Earth have undergone through the influence of external nature, migrations from one climate to another, etc. If only the idea just set out were practicable, the name ‘natural history’ would assume a much higher import, for it would then actually convey a history of nature herself, namely of how through continual deviations from a common ideal she gradually brings forth the whole multiplicity of her products and thus realises that ideal, not indeed in individual products, but in the whole.15
Here we have a proposal for the a priori derivation of the entire natural system, a system that is conceived not as the plan of a transcendent creator, but as the realization of an ideal immanent


Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 235


in nature. However, for sustained attempts at such a derivation we have to turn from Schelling to his disciples.
Let us start with the study of minerals, the first kingdom of nature. Henrich Steffens (1773-1845), Norwegian by birth, studied at Copenhagen and Kiel, where he obtained his doctorate in miner-alogy.16 In 1798 he met Schelling, becoming his ardent follower, and embarked on further studies of mineralogy under Abraham Gottlob Werner at the famous Freiberg Bergakademie. He then taught geology, mineralogy, and NaturphilosopHie at Halle, Breslau, and Berlin, of which he became Rector Magnificus in 1833.
Steffens’s first major work, Beytrage zur inneren Naturgeschichte der Erde (‘Contributions to the Inner Natural History of the Earth’) of 1801, dedicated to Goethe, is by naturphilosophische standards fairly accessible. The work opens sedately proposing to combine chemistry with geognosy in the study of minerals and rocks. Werner defined geognosy as ‘that part of mineralogy which acquaints us systematically and thoroughly with the solid earth, that is, with its relationship to those natural bodies that surround it and which are familiar to us, and also, especially, with the circumstances of its external and internal formation and the min-erals of which it consists according to their differences and modes of formation’.17 Steffens follows Werner’s geognostic theory of formation of rocks by deposition from a primal ocean, though unlike Werner he insists on the prevalence of chemical rather than mechanical causes. The chemical processes of rock forma-tion, Steffens claims, express the two fundamental vital powers, a carbon-based power of vegetation and a nitrogen-based power of animation. The vegetative power has given rise to the primitive siliceous rocks in which vegetable fossil remains predominate. The animating power has given rise to the more advanced cal-careous rocks, in which animal fossils predominate. Having elab-orated these general correspondences between vital, chemical, and geognostic processes, Steffens turns to a consideration of the origin of the individual inhabitants of the world: minerals, plants, and animals. The perfect natural history would derive the mani-fest diversity of beings a priori, step by step from the original ideal: but Steffens reluctantly settles for a more modest ‘reductive’ approach, one by which laws are conjectured on the basis of comparative observations and then, with luck, shown to be in agreement with higher laws derived a priori. As a specimen of this approach he presents a classification of the metals into two series. Allied to Nitrogen there is the ‘fluid’, vegetative series, from Arsenic to Mercury; allied to Carbon is the ‘coherent’, animated series, from Antimony to Gold. After a long account of the chemistry of the metals and their ores Steffens sketches
an a priori derivation of the two metal series and their earthly


236 Nicholas Jardine


1


distribution. Building on Schelling’s Erster Entwurf eines Systems . der Naturphilosophie, he derives a ‘double polarity’ of the earth,
North-South embodying the duality of magnetism and its polar representatives Nitrogen and Carbon, East-West embodying the duality of electricity and its polar representatives Hydrogen and Oxygen. He infers from this that the more coherent metals must be more abundant near the Poles, the more fluid ones more abundant in the equatorial regions. The final section deals with plants and animals. His account is based on the ‘Law of Suc-cession of Organic Forces’ that Carl Friedrich Kielmeyer (1765—
1844), teacher of zoology at the Hohen Karlsschule at Stuttgart, had presented in his address über die Verh.ltnisse der organischen Kr.fte (‘On the Relations between Organic Forces’) of 1793.18 In
, plants and the lower animals the reproductive force predominates, in insects the force of irritability, and in the higher animals the force of sensibility. Within each of these major groups there is a development from generalized to more specialized forms, the structure of each form being expressive of a particular ratio of the organic forces. The entire sequence culminates in man, ‘the most individual of all forms’.
Steffens’s later natural historical works build on the themes of this one. In his Geognostisch-geologische Aufs.tze (‘Geognostic- Geological Essays’) of 1810, he greatly expands his account of the chemical genesis of rocks and speculatively relates the distribution of fossils to past climatic changes. In his Vollst.ndiges Handbuch der Oryctognosie (‘Complete Handbook of Oryctognosy’) of 1811— 24, devoted, as the term ‘oryctognosy’ implies, to the classification of minerals, he proposes a scheme which combines the Wernerian genetic method with his own chemical approach. His Grundzüge der philosophischen Naturwissenschaft (‘Foundations of Philosophical Natural Science’) of 1806, opens with an impassioned attack on the Enlightenment ‘science of appearance’ and a defence of the new ‘science of the inner life of nature’ inaugurated by Schelling. Through the new science the history of the universe will be ful-filled, mankind achieving at the level of reflection the lost union with nature, nature being completed by her mirroring in science. In the body of this aphoristically presented work Steffens expands his earlier Schellingian cosmological speculations; he amplifies his treatment of the carbonic and nitrogenous series of metals; and he recasts his account of the development of living beings as a story of the progressive realization of spirit in matter.
As protagonist for plants, the second kingdom of nature, I have chosen Christian Gottfried Daniel Nees von Esenbeck (1776-1858), radical democrat, Catholic social reformer, protégé of Goethe, Pro-fessor of botany and Director of the botanic garden first at


Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 237


Erlangen then at Breslau, and from 1818 to his death President of the Leopoldina (Leopoldinisch-Carolinische Akademie der Naturforscher).19 In fact, on his own reckoning Esenbeck was an expert on two kingdoms of nature, for as a mycologist he argued heatedly and at length for the recognition of fungi as an indepen-dent realm.
Esenbeck’s major work of naturphilosophische botany, the two- volume Handbuch der Botanik of 1821-2, dedicated to Goethe, was published in the massive series of textbooks through which Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert (1780-1860), Professor of Natural History at Erlangen, aimed to disseminate the new ‘scientific’ natural his-tory. Esenbeck’s book is full of bizarre, to us almost surreal, ana-logies and aesthetic speculations; and it is hard to envisage its use as a textbook. (He is, however, outclassed in oddity by his friend Georg August Goldfu., Professor of Zoology and Mineralogy at Bonn: see Figure 14.1.) In the opening sections of the work Esen-beck sketches a priori constructions of the kingdoms of nature and of the basic structures and functions of plant anatomy and physio-logy. Thus, using Steffens’s, ‘double polarity’ of the Earth, Esen-beck associates fungi with the primordial polarity, the North Pole, and Earth: ‘Mushrooms are the expression of the Earth, being-for- itself, founded on itself, reverting to itself (the first simple polarity, ±). So mushrooms belong to the North Pole, are northern plants and ever seek their way back into rest, sleep, and death.’ Higher plants represent the second polarity, ±/—, the South Pole, and the Sun. The animals represent the West, the third polarity ahd mid-night; man represents the East, the fourth polarity and midday. From the formula ±/— Esenbeck derives the principal types and dispositions of organs, tissues, cells and fibres in the higher plants (Table 14.1). The body of the work is concerned with ‘organogra-phy’, providing for each plant organ - root, stem, leaf, flower, seed, etc. - expositions of anatomy and physiology followed by extensive accounts of their metamorphoses, that is, their life- histories, their transformations in the ideal sequences of plant types, and their modifications caused by sickness. Here Esenbeck pays repeated tribute to Goethe’s Die Metamorphose der Pflanzen (‘The Metamorphosis of Plants’) of 1790, in which the series of plant appendages - from seed-leaves to organs of fructification - were derived through processes of expansion, contraction, and per-fection from the primordial leaf {Urblatt).2Q
Esenbeck’s Handbuch was not a success, and his later natural historical works are more orthodox in content and presentation. In particular, his masterpiece, Naturgeschichte der europ.ischen Leb-ermoose (‘Natural History of the European Liverworts’) of 1833— 8, though introduced in the Romantic manner as the first of a


238 Nicholas jardine




Figure 14. i The ordering of the animal kingdom in conformity with the ‘great egg of nature’; from G. A. Goldfu., Ueber die Entwicklungsstufen des Thieves (Nuremberg, 1817); on Goldfu. see H. von Querner’s introduction to the facsimile reprint (Marburg, 1979)-





projected series of ‘memories of the Riesengebirge’, is devoid of Naturphilosophie, and his substantial treatise on Naturphilosophie of 1841 is almost devoid of natural history.
As historian of the animal kingdom I have chosen another politi-cal radical, Lorenz Oken (1779-1851), student of J. F. Blumen-bach at G.ttingen, disciple then rival of Schelling, friend then enemy of Goethe, holder of Chairs in Medicine and Natural His-tory at Jena, Munich, and Zurich.21 As a prolific and innovative


Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature 239


Table 14.1. Esenbeck’s derivation of the fundamentals of plant anatomy from the double polarity of the Earth:. Handbuch der Botanik, vol. I, p. 40. Note that the growth of the flower is described as 'regressive' because it ceases after producing a definite number of organs, by contrast with the open-ended 'progressive' growth of the stem.

I II III
Texture Structure Formation
(=Cell=Pith = Root) (=Elongated cell = Bast=Stem) (^Spiral fibre=Wood=Leaf)
+ -
or

I
 Il.a
 II.b
 III
 
Texture
 Structure
 Structure
 Formation
 
(=Cell
 (=Elongated cell
 (=Elongated (wood) cell
 (=Spiral fibre
 
=Pith
 =Bast
 =Bast (cell of the spiral fibre
 =Wood
 
=Rdot)
 =Stem)
 bundle)
=Stem)
 =Leaf)
 
+
 —
 +
 -
 


Only in the regressive growth of the flower

comparative anatomist, founder of Isis (a major European forum for natural history), and mastermind of the Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Aerzte (the model for the British Association for the Advancement of Science), Oken was by far the best known of the naturphilosophischen natural historians.
In a speech of 1809, Oken protests that the cultivation of natural history only for its practical and commercial fruits in medicine and agriculture leads to a ‘senseless enumeration, description and naming of animals’.22 In place of such an ignoble, ‘profiteering’ natural history, he pleads for a natural history integrated into the new Naturphilosophie. This noble natural history will unify the German people with themselves and the world; it will give them an understanding of their own nature and of their relations to plants and animals; and it will imbue them with manly resignation when their power falls short of their understanding. Such is the natural history set out by Oken in his Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie (‘Textbook of Nature Philosophy’) of 1809-11 and its companion Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte (‘Textbook of Natural History’) of 1813-26. The first of these works offers a derivation from God, the ‘primordial zero’, of a comparative anatomy and natural classi-fication of living beings. The second uses the anatomy and classifi-cation as the basis for a comprehensive descriptive natural history.
The ‘Textbook of Nature Philosophy’, dedicated to Schelling and Goethe, is an extraordinary document. It consists of numbered paragraphs (3,562 in the first edition) and combines an elaborate dialectical construction in the manner of Schelling and Steffens with a plethora of often apparently weird analogies. Oken’s friend


240 Nicholas Jardine


Alexander Ecker aptly remarked that ‘the language seems to come to us out a remote past as though wafted from the tongues of Egyp-tian priests’.23 The work opens with a ‘mathesis’ in which Gravity, Light, Heat, and Fire are derived as direct manifestations of God, and an ‘ontology’ which combines elements of Schelling’s cos-mogony and Werner’s geognosy in an account of the formation of the solar system, the Earth, and the principal rock formations and mineral types. The account of living beings, ‘biology’, starts with the primordial units of life, formed by the action of the air on the primordial sea-slime (Urschleim). By construction Oken argues that these units must be vesicles (Bl.schen): ‘The organic must become a vesicle, since it is a galvanic process which can take place only between the elements. The action of air is necessarily an external one, so it divides the slime inwards.into the earthy and the watery, cell-wall and cell-content.’ For good measure, he adds a brisk argu-ment by analogy: ‘The organic must be a vesicle because it is the image of the planet.’ In isolation the vesicles occur in water as Infusoria-, variously combined they constitute other types of organ-ism. The second stage, rather perfunctorily executed, is the con-struction of the plant kingdom. The third stage, which synthesizes the other two, is the construction of the animal kingdom, culminat-ing in man, the complete and perfect realization of God. (In fact, following Goethe and Petrus Camper, Oken believed that the full perfection of man, though realized in ancient Greek statuary, was yet to be attained: see Figure 14.2.) The basis of this construction is provided by a ranking of the organic processes associated with the four elements. From this is derived a partition of the animal body into tissues, organ systems, and organs. The series of types of animals is then built up by addition and reduplication of suc-cessively higher ranking organs, culminating in man, who pos-sesses all organs in their highest form - hence Oken’s pronounce-ment: ‘The animal kingdom is but a dismemberment of the highest animal, man.’
The principal ranking of animal types is the sequence of seven-teen classes, from infusorians to mammals, shown in Table 14.2.24 In the course of its development from fertilized egg to adult, an animal of a given class passes in turn through stages representative of each of the classes that rank below it.
The foetus is a representation of all animal classes in time. At first it is a simple vesicle, stomach, or vitellus, as in the Infusoria. Then the vesicle is doubled through the albumen and shell, and obtains an intestine as in Corals . . . With the appearance of the osseous system, into the class of Fishes. With the evolution of muscles, into the class of Reptiles. With the ingress of respiration through the lungs into the class of Birds.25
The criteria used to demarcate and rank the classes of animals are iteratively applied within each class to provide a demarcation and


Naturphilosophie and the kingdoms of nature


241




ranking of orders, families, and genera.26 In the resultant scheme there are correspondences between types of different categories in the hierarchy (between classes and families, between families and genera) and also between lower and higher types of the same categories (between fishes and birds, between birds and mammals, for example). All these correspondences are reflected in ‘analogies’ of anatomical structure. Some of these analogies involve transform-ations of a structural type similar to those postulated by Goethe. Indeed, Oken and Goethe became involved in a bitter priority dis-pute over the ‘discovery’ that the skull is derived from a transform-ation and fusion of a series of primordial vertebrae.27 Others of Oken’s analogies, however, invoke transformations stranger and more extreme than anything countenanced by Goethe: ‘the nose is the thorax repeated in the head’; ‘the limbs of insects are the ribs of mammals’; ‘the fish is a mussel from between whose shells a monstrous abdomen has grown’.
Oken’s system is an extraordinary feat of synthesis. It takes a decisive stand on every one of the major controversial issues in the natural history of the period - the basis of the process of gener-ation, the form of the natural system, the relation between form and function, the role of God in the natural world. Moreover, it is a system which tightly integrates the description, classification, anatomy, physiology, and chemistry of living beings.

Figure 14.2 The perfection of the skull, culminating in the European and the Antique Ideal; from The Works of the Late Professor Camper, on the Connexion between the Science of Anatomy and the Arts of Drawing, Painting, Statuary, trans. T. Cogan (London, 1794)-
